THE DIARIES OF FRANZ KAFKA 
19IO-1913 

Initial Page of the Manuscript of the^Duiries 



The onlookers go tigid when the train goes past. 

“IMie should forever ahsk me.” The ah, released from the 
sentence, hew off like a ball on the meadow. 

His gravity is the death of me. His head in its collas, his 
hair arranged immovably on his skull, the muscfes of his 
jo^sjielow, tensed m their places — 

• 

Are the woods still there’ The woods were still almost 
there. But hardly had my glance gone ten steps farther 
when I left off, again caught up in the tedious conversation. 

In the dark woods, on the sodden ground, I found my 
way only by the whiteness of his collar. 

In a dream I asked the dancer Eduardova ^ to dance the 
"Czardas just one tin^e more. She had a broad streak of ‘ 
shadow or light across the middle of her face between the 
lower part of her forehead and the cleft of her chin. Just 
then someone with the loathsome gestures of an uncon- 
scious intrigu er appr oached to tell her the train was leaving 
mipjediatelyT The manner'm which she listened to this an- 
nouncement made it terribly clear to me that she would 
not dance again “I am a wicked, evil woman, am I not’” 
she said. “0 h* no. ” I said, “not that,” and turned away aim- 
lessly . 

Before that had questioned her about the many flowers 

FRA^NZ KAFKA 

that were^ stuck into her girdle. “They are from all the 
princes «of Europe,” said she. I pondered as to what this 
tnight mean— that all those fresh flowers stuck in her girdle 
had been presented to the dancer Eduardova by_ aU the 
prmces of Europe. 

The dancer Eduardova, a lover of music, travels hi the 
trolley, as everywhere else, in the company of two vigorous 
violimsts whom she has play often. For there is no known 
reaspn why one should not play in the trolley if the play- 
ing IS good, pleasing to the fellow passengers, and costs 
nothing, i.e., if the hat is not passed around afterward. Of 
course, at first it is a little surprising and for a short while 
everybody finds it improper. But at full speed, in a strong 
breeze and on a silent street, it sounds quite nice. 

The dancer Eduardova is not as pretty in the open air 
as on the stage. Her faded color, her cheekbones which 
draw her skin so taut that there is scarcely a trace of mouon 
in her face and a real face is no longer possible, the large 
nose, which rises as though out of a cavity, with which one 
can take no liberties— such as testing the hardness of the 
point or taking it gently by the bridge and pulling it back 
and forth while one says, “But now you come along ” The 
large figure with the high waist in skirts with too many 
pleats— whom can that please?— she looks like one of my 
aunts, an elderly lady; many elderly aunts of many people 
look like that. In the open air Eduardova really has nothing 
to compensate for these disadvantages, moreover, aside 
from her very good feet; there is actually 'nothing that 
would give occasion for enthusiasm, astonishment or even 
for respect. And so I have actually seen Eduardova very 
often treated with a degree of indifference .that even gen- 



II 


DIARIES ipiO^ 

demen, who were otherwise very adroit, vei^ correct, 
could not conceal, although they naturally -niadiJ every 
effort to do so in the presence of so famous a dancer as, 
Eduajdova still was. 

♦ 

The auric^p of my ear felt fsesh, rough, cool, succulent 
as a l^f, to the touch. 

I write this very decidedly out of despair over my body 
and over a future with this body. * * 

When despair shows itself so definitely, is so tied to its 
object, so pent up, as in a soldier who covers a retreat and 
thus lets himself be torn to pieces, then it is not true despair. 
True despair overreaches its goal immediately and always, 
(at this comma it became clear that only the first sentence 
was correct). 

Do^ou despair’ 

Yes’ You despau:’ 

You run away’ You want to hide’ 

Iji^sed By the brothel as though past the houseofa be- 
Joved. 

9 

Writers speak a stench. 

9 

The seamstresses in the downpour of rain.® 

Fi^llv- aftei; five montrhs of my life during which I 
coiffld write nothing that would have satisfied me, and for 
which no power will compensate me, though all were under 
obligaoon to Vlo’so, it occurs to me to talk to myself again. 
^Whenever I really questioned myself, there was always a 
I response forthcoming, there was always something in me 
to catch fire, ’in this heap of straw that I have been for five# 



months and whose fate, it seems, is to be set afire dur- 
ing the suipmer and consumed more swiftly than the 
j onlooker can blink his eyes If only that would happen 
to me' And tenfold ought that to happen to me, for I do 
^not even regret this unhappy time. My condition is not un- 
happiness, but It is also not happiness, not indifference, not 
^weakness, not fatigue, not another interest— so whaf is it 
then^ That I do not know this is probably connected with 
fny inability to write And without knowing the reason for 
It, I^believe i understand the latter. All those things, that is 
to say, those things which occur to me, occur to me not 
from the root up but rather only from somewhere about 
their middle. Let someone then attempt to seize them, let 
someone attempt to seize a blade of grass and hold fast to it 
when it begins to grow only from the middle. 

There are some people who can do this, probably, Japa- 
nese jugglers, for example, who scramble up a ladder that 
does not rest on the ground but on the raised soles of some- 
one half lying on the ground, and which does not lean 
against a wall but just goes up into the air. I cannot do this— 
aside from the fact that my ladder does not even haye those 
soles at Its disposal This, naturally, isn’t all, and it isn’t such 
a question that prompts me to speak' But every day at least 
one line should be trained on me, as they now tram ^le- 
scopes on comets. And if then I should appear before that • 
sentence once, lured by that sentence, just as, for instance, 

I was last Christmas, when I was so far gone that I was 
barely able to control myself and when I seemed reali^on 
the last rung of my ladder, which, ‘however, rested quiedy 
on the ground and against a wall. But what grpund, what 
a wall! And yet that ladder did not fall], so strongly did my 
feet press it against the ground, so strongly did my feet 
raise it against the wall. 



DIARIES 1910 ) 13 

Today, foe instance, I acted three pieces^ of 'iiisolenge, 
toward a conductor, toward someone introduced to me— 
well, there were only two, but they hujt hke a stomach- j 
ache. On the part of anyone they would Jiave been insolent, 
how much the more sb on my part. Therefore I went out- 
side myself, ffeught in the air anuH the mist, and, worst of all,' 
no oift noticed that I was even insolent to my, companions, ’ 
a piece of insolence as such, and had to be, and had to as- 
sume the proper manner for it and the responsibility, bu^ 
the worst was when one of my acquaintances took this in- 
solence not even as the indication of a personality bht 
rather as the personality itself, called my attention to my 
insolence and admired it. Why don’t I stay within myself!* 
’To be sure, I now say to myself Look, the world submits 
to'your blows, the conductor and the person introduced. 

• to you remained undisturbed, as you left, the latter even 
said gbodbye But that means nothing. You can achieve 
nothing if you forsake yourself, but what do you miss, 
aside from this, in your circle!* To this appeal I answer 
only I too would rather submit to blows within the circle 
than myself deal the blows outside it— but where the devil 
is this circle!* For a tijne, indeed, I did see it lying on the 
earth, as if sprayed in lime, but now it just sort of hovers 
abdbt me, indeed, does not even hover. 

Night of comets. May 17-18. 1 

I T agr dier with Blei, his v^ife and child, from time to time 
lisfmed to myself outside of myself, it sounded like die 
whimpering of a, young cat. 

How many 'days ’have again gone silently by; today is 
May 28. Havel not even the resolution to take this pen- 
f holder, this piece of wood, in my hand every day!* I really 



FR/ NZ KAFKA 


14 

think I dt# not. I row, ride, swim, lie in the sun. Therefore 
my calves are good, my thighs not bad, my belly will pa. 
muster, but my chest is very shabby and if my head set low 
between my shoulders — 

" Sunday, July 19 , slept, lawoke, slept, awoke, miserable 
-life. ‘ 

^ When I think about it, I must say that my education h 
done me great harm in some respects I was not, as a matte 
01 fact, educated in any out-of-the-way place, in a ruin 
say, in the mountains— something against which in fact 1 
could not have brought myself to say a word of rep^’oach. 
In spite of the risk of having the entire roster of my former 
teachers not understand this, I should prefer most of all to 
have been such a little dweller in the ruins, burnt by the sun 
which would have shone for me there on the tepid ivy 
between the remains on every side; even though I might 
have been weak at first under the pressure of my good 
qualities, which would have grown tall in me with the 
might of weeds. 

I When I think about it, I must say that my education has 
done me great harm m some respects. This reproach applies 
to a multitude of people— that is to sa.y, my parents, several 
relatives, individual visitors to our house, various writers, 
a certain particular cook who took me to school fc- 5 vear, 
a crowd of teachers (whom I must press tightly togeuier 
in my memory, otherwise one would drop out here and 
there— but since I have pressed them together so, the. Whole 
mass crumbles away bit by bit anyhow) , a school inspector, 
slowly walking passers-by; in short, this feproach twists 
through society hke a dagger. And no one, I repeat, un- 



DIARIES I 9 I.\ 15 

fortunately no one, can be sure as to whether'tlie point of 
'? the dagger won’t suddei^ly appear sometime m front, in 
, back, or from the side. I do not want t9 hear this reproach 
contradicted, since I have already heard too many contra- 
dictions, and since most of the contradictions, moreover, ‘ 
have refuted me, I include thtse contradictions in my. re- 
proach and now declare that my education and this refuta- 
tion have done me great harm in many respects 

> » 

I Often I think it over and then I always have to say that > 

I my education has done me great harm in some ways. This 
' reproach is directed against a multitude of people, indeed, 
they, stand here together and, as in old group photographs, 
they do not know what to do about each other, it simply 
does not occur to them to lower their eyes, and out of an- 
ticipation they do not dare smile Among them are my 
parents;' several relatives, several teachers, a certain particu- 
lar cook, several girls at dancmg school, several visitors to 
our house in earlier times, several writers, a swimming 
teacher, a jicket-seller, a school inspector, then some people 
that I met only once on the street, and others that I just 
’ cannot recall and those whom I shall never again recall, 
and those, finally, Avhose instruction, being somehow dis- 
tracted at the time, I did not nonce at all, in short, there are 
so many that one must take care not to name anyone twice. 
And I address my reproach to them all, introduce them to 

I on^jjjjather in.this way, but tolerate no contradiction. For 
henestly I have borne enough contradictions already, and 
since most of them have refuted me, all I can do is include 
these ^refutafions, too, in my reproach, and say that aside 
from my education these refutations have also done me 
great harm inlsome respects. 

Does one suspect, perhaps, that I was educated in some 



i6 


; JLAT^X KAFKA 

out-of-the-way placed No, I was educated m ,the middle 
of the city, in the middle of the city. Not, for example, in 
arum in the mountains or beside the lake My reproach had 
until now qovered my parents and their retinue and made 
them gray, but now they easdy pusli it aside and smile, 
because I have drawn my hands away from ?hem to my 
forehead and am thinking I should have been that little 
dweller in the rums, hearkening to the cries of the crows, 
soared over by their shadows, cooling under the moon, 
burne by the sun which would have shone for me from all 
sides on my bed of ivy, even though I might have been a 
little weak at first under the pressure of my good qualities, 
which would have had to grow m me with the might of 
weeds. 

Often I think it over and give my thoughts free rein, 
without interfering, and always, no matter how I turn or 
twist It, I come to the conclusion that in some respects my 
I education has done me terrible harm. There inheres in the 
recognition of this a reproaph directed against a multitude 
of people There are my parents and my relatives, a certain 
particular cook, my teachers, several writers— the love 
with which they harmed me makes their guilt even grea^pr, 
for how much [good] they could hpe [done] me with 
their love— several families friendly with my family, a 
swimming teacher, natives of summer resorts, several Jadies 
in the city park of whom this would not at all have been ex- 
pected, a hairdresser, a beggarwoman, a helmsman, the 
family doctor, and many more besides; and.there would be 
still more if I could and wanted to name than all, in short, 
there are so many that one must be careful not td name 
anyone in the lot twice. 



DIARIES a 9 1 4 

Now one might think that these great nuih/iers would 
make a reproach lose its firmness, that it would simply have 
to lose Its firmness, because a reproaches not an army gem- 
eralf It just goes straight ahead and does not k^ow How to 
distribute its force'? Especially in this case, when it is di- 
rected agaitist pers ns in the Jiast. Forgotten energy may 
holfi these persons fast in memory, but they would hardly 
have any ground left under them and even their legs would 
have already turned to smoke. And how expect it to be pf 
any use to throw up to people in such a condition the, mis- . 
takes they once made in earlier times in educating a boy 
who is as incomprehensible to them now as they to us. But 
indeed one cannot even do as much as make them remem- 
ber those times, no person can compel them to do so; obvi- 
ously one cannot mention compulsion at all, they ca^n 
remember nothing, and if you press them, they push you 
duiribi^ aside, for most probably they do not even hear the 
words. Like tired dogs they stand there, because they use 
up all their strength in remaining upright in one’s memory. 

But if you actually did make them hear and speak, then 
your fears would only hum with counterreproaches, for 
people take the conviction of the venerability of the dead 
along with them into the beyond and uphold it ten times 
a^much from there. And if perhaps this opinion is not cor- 
rect and the dead do stand in especially great awe of the 
living, then they would side with their own living past all 
thwiiere— after all, it’s closest to them— and again our ears 
•VTOuld hum And if this opinion, too, is not correct and the 
dead are after all very impartial, even then they could never 
sanction their being disturbed by unverifiable reproaches. 
For such reprostphes are unverifiable even as between one 
person and another. The existence of past mistakes in edu- 
cation cannot'>be proved, so how much the less the original 



l8 L.RAWZ KAFKA 

responsibility for them. And now let me see a reproach that 
in such a situation would not be transformed into a sigh. 

" That IS the reproach that I have to make. It has a sound 
core, theory supports it. That which really has been spoiled 
m me, however, I forget for the moihent or excuse, and 
don’t as yet make any fuss about it. On the other hand, I 
Can prove at any time that my education tried to make 
another person out of me than the one I became. It is for 
the harm, therefore, that my educators could have done me 
in accordance with their intentions that I reproach them; I 
demand from their hands the person I now am, and since 
they cannot give him to me, I make of my reproach and 
laughter a drumbeat sounding mto the world beyond; But 
all this only serves a different purpose. The reproach for 
having after all spoiled a part of me— for having spoiled a 
good, beautiful part (in my dreams sometimes it appears 
to me the way a dead bride appears to others)— thfe re- 
proach that IS forever on the point of becoming a sigh, this 
reproach should before all else reach there undam'aged as 
an honest reproach, which is what it is, too. Thus it hap- 
pens that the great reproach, to which nothing can happen, 
takes the small one by the hand, if th? great one walks, the 
small one hops, but when once the small one gets there, it 
distinguishes itself— which is what we have always expeetbd 
—and sounds the trumpet for the drummer. 

Often I think it over and give my thoughts frCa^Kin, 
without interfering, but I always come to the conclusidn 
that my education has spoiled me more than I can under- 
stand. Externally I am a man like others, fOr my physical 
education kept as close to the ordinary as my body itself 
was ordinary, and even if I am pretty short and a little stout, 
I still please many, even girls. There is nothing to be said 



DIARIES I 9 I O 1 19 

about that. Only recently one of them said sometllmg very 
intelligent: “Ah, if I could only see you naked once, then 
you ought to be really pretty and kissable.” But if I lacked 
an upper lip here, there an ear, here a rib, there a finger, if 
I had hairless spots on<ny head and pockmarks on my face, 
this would stkl be no adequate counterpart to my inner im-* 
perfection. This irpperfection is not congenital and there- 
fore so much the more painful to bear. For like everyone, I 
'too have my center of ’gravity inside me from birth, and* 
this not even the most foolish education could displ^e.^ 
This good center of gravity I still have, but to a certain ex- 
tent I no longer have the corresponding body. And a center 
of gravity that has no work to do becomes lead, ancf sticks 
in the body hke a musket ball. But this imperfection is not 
earned either, I have suffered its emergence through no, 
fault of my own. This is why I can find nowhere within 
myseli any repentance, much as I may seek it. For re- 
pentance would be good for me, it cries itself out all by 
itself, it takes the pain to one side and settles everything 
alone like aq affair of honor, we remain upright because it 
' relieves us. 

‘ My imperfection is,^as I said, not congenital, not earned, 
nevertheless I bear it better than others, by means of great 
labor of the imagination and sought-out expedients, bear 
much smaller misforeunes— a horrible wife, for instance, 
poverty, a miserable profession— and am at the same time 
not "li black in the face*with despair, but rather white 
and red. 

I would not be so, if my education had penetrated into 
me as deeply 'as -it wanted to Perhaps my youth was too 
short for that, in which case, now in my forties,® I still re- 
joice oifer its shortness with all my heart That alone made 
it possible for" me to have enough strength left to become 



20 


JFRAiNZ KAFKA 


conscious "of the deprivations of my youth; further, to 
suffer through these deprivations, further, to reproach the 
past in all respects, and, finally, to have left a remnant of 
strength for myself. But all these strengths are, again, only 
a remnant of those I possessed as a child, which exposed me 
more than otheis to the corruptors of youth, yes, a good 
racing chariot is the first to be pursued and overtake’n by 
dust and wind, and its wheels fly over obstacles so that one 
might almost believe in love. 

. ''S^hat I still am now is revealed most clearly to me by the 
strength with which the reproaches urge their way out of 
me. There were times when I had nothing else inside me 
except reproaches driven by rage, so that, although*phys- 
^ally well, I would hold on to strangers in the street 
/because the reproaches inside me tossed from side to side 
like water m a basin that was being carried rapidly. 

Those times are past. The reproaches he around inside 
me like strange tools that I hardly have the courage to seize 
and lift any longer. At the same time the corruption left 
by my old education seems to begin to affect me again more 
and more, the passion to remember, perhaps a geneial char- 
acteristic of bachelors of my age, opens my heart again to 
those people who should be the objects of my reproaches, 
and an event like that of yesterday, formerly as frequeilt as 
eating, is now so rare that I make a note of it. 

But even above and beyond that, I myself, I who have 
just now put down my pen in order to open the Wswiow, 
am perhaps the best aid of my assailants For I underesti- 
mate myself, and that in itself means an overestimation of 
others; but even aside from that I overestimate them. And 
aside from that I also do harm to myself directly. If I am 
overcome by the desire to make reproaches, I look out of 
the window. Who could deny that the fishermen sit there 



21 


DIARIES I^IO 

in their boats like pupils who have been taken»tiut to the 
river from school, good, their immobility is often incom- 
prehensible, like that of flies on windowpanes. And over, 
' the bridge go the trolleys, naturally as always with aToar- 
ing rude as the wmdk, and they sound like spoiled clocks, 
and the pohaeman, no doubt, bfeck from head to foot, with 
"the yellow light of the badge on his chest, reminds one of 
nothing else but hell when now, with thoughts similar to 
mine, he contemplates a fisherman who suddenly— is Kfe 
crying, has he seen an apparition or is his float bobbinj;^— 
bends down to the side of his boat. All this is all right, but 
in Its own time, now only my reproaches are right. 

Thfy are directed against a multitude of people', this is 
really frightening and not only I at the open window but 
everyone else as well would rather look at the river. There 
are my parents and relatives. That they have done me harm 
out of love makes their guilt all the greater, for how much 
good they could have done me out of love, then friendly 
families* with the evil eye, out of their sense of guilt they 
make themselves heavy and refuse to rise up into memory, 
then a crowd of nurses, teachers and writers and among 
‘'them a certain particular cook, then, their punishment be- 
ing that they fade into one another, a family doctor, a hair- 
dresser, a helmsman, a beggarwoman, a newspaper vendor, 
a park watchman, a swimming teacher, then strange ladies 
in the city park of whom one would not have expected it 
at all. natives of summeu. resorts, an insult to the inno- 
cence of nature, and many others; but there were still more, 
if I could and wanted to name them all, in short, there are 
so m!\jiy that one must take care not to name any one of 
them twice. 

I often thihk it over and give my thoughts free rein with- 



22 


t FRil NZ KAFKA 

out interfering, but I always come to the same conclusion: 
that my education has spoiled me more than all the people 
I know and mor^ than I can conceive. Yet only once in a 
long* while can I say this, for if I am asked immediately 
after, “Really^ Is that possible? Aro you supposed to be- 
‘lieve that!'” out of nervous fear I immediately try to re- 
strict It, 

Externally I lobk like everybody else, have legs, body 
and head, trousers, coat and hat, they put me through a 
,rhQrough course of gymnastics and if I have nevertheless 
remained rather short and weak, that just could not be 
helped. Besides, I am agreeable to many people, even young 
girls, and those to whom I am not agreeable still fisid me 
bearable. 

c 

It is reported, and we are inchned to believe it, that when 
men are in danger they have no consideration evan for 
beautiful strange women, they shove them against walls, 
shove them with head and hands, knees and elbows, if these 
women happen only to be in the way of their, flight from 
the burning theater. At this point our chattering women 
fall silent, their endless talking reaches a verb and period, 
their eyebrotvs rise out of their resting places, the rhythmic 
movement of their thighs and hips is interrupted; into their 
mouths, only loosely closed by feaBj more air than usual 
enters and their cheeks seem a little puffed out.^ 

**You,” I said, and gave him a little shove with my knee 
(at this sudden utterance some saliva flew from my mouth 
as an evil omen) , “don’t fall asleep! ” 

“I’m not falling asleep,” he answered, and shook his head 
while opening his eyes. ‘If I were to fall asleep, how could 
I guard you then? And don’t I have to do -that? Isn’t that 



4 


I 

*3 


DIARIES 1^10* 

why you grabbed hold of me then in front of the church? 
Yes, It was a long tune ago, we Itnow it, just leave your 
watch in your pocket ” 

“It’s really very late,” I said. I had to ^mile a little and in 
order to conceal it I Ijoked intently intd the house. 

“Does it r§ally please you so much!' So you would like to 
ego up, very much like to!* Then just say so, after all, I won’t 
bite you. Look, if you think that it will be better for you up 
• there than down here, then just go up there at once without 
thinking of me. It’s my opimon— therefore the opimon of 
a casual passer-by— that you will soon come down again 
and that it would then be very good if somehow someone 
should be standing here whose face you won’t even look at, 
but who’ll take you under the arm, strengthen you with 
wine in a nearby tavern and then lead you to his room 
which, miserable as it is, still has a few panes of glass be- 
tween Itself and the night, for the time being you don’t have 
to give a damn about this opinion. True it is, and I can re- 
peat that in front of anyone you hke, that it goes badly with 
us here below; yes, it’s even a dog’s life, but there’s no help 
for me now, whether I he here in the gutter and stow away 
' the rain water or drink champagne with the same lips up 
there under the chanflelicr makes no difference to me. Be- 
sicjfs, I don’t even have so much as a choice between the 
' two things, indeed, anythmg that attracts people’s atten- 
tion never happens to me, and how could it happen within 
the framework of the cerejnonies that are necessary for me, 
within which indeed I can only crawl on, no better than 
some sort of Vermin. You, to be sure, who know all that 
may be hidden in yourself, you have courage, at least you 
think you have. Tiy it anyhow, what do you have to lose, 
after dl— often ybu can already recogmze yourself, if you 
pay attention, in the face of the servant at the door.” 



24 |fRA,NZ KAFKA 

“If I )il«; knew definitely that you were being sincere 
with me I ^ould have been up there long ago. But how 
could I even tell whether you were sincere with me^ You’re 
looking at me now as though I were a little child, that 
doesn’t help me at all, that indeed maljes it even worse. But 
perhaps you want to make it worse. At the saipe time I can 
no longer stand the air in the street, so I already belong 
with the company .up there. When I pay attention there’s a 
scratching in my throat, there you have it Besides, I cough. 
And have y6u any idea how I’ll get along up there" The 
foot with which I step into the hall will already be trans- 
formed before I can draw the other one after it.” 

“You are right, I am not smcere with you.” ^ 

“I want to leave, want to mount the steps, if necessary, 
by turning somersaults. From that company I promise my- 
self everything that I lack, the organization of my strength, 
above all, for which the sort of intensification that 4s the 
only possibility for this bachelor on the street is insufficient. 
The latter would be satisfied just to maintain his— really— . 
shabby physique, protect his few meals, avoid the influence 
of other people, in short, to preserve only as much as is 
possible in the disintegrating world. But if he loses any-V 
thing, he seeks to get it back by force, though it be trans-j 1 
formed, weakened, yes, even though it be his former prop- 
erty only in seeming (which it is for the most part;. His 
nature is suicidal, therefore, it has teeth only for his own 
flesh and flesh only for his own teeth. For without 5 center, 
without a profession, a love, a family, an income, i.e., with- 
out holding one’s own against the -World in the big things 
—only tentatively, of course— without, therefore, mak- 
ing to a certain extent an imposing impression on it by a 
great complex of possessions, one cannot protect oneself 
from losses that momentarily destroy one. This bachelor 



DIARIES ig 10 * Zjl* 

t 

With his thin clothes, his art of prayer, his enduring legs, 
his lodgings that he is afraid of, with his otherwise patched- 
up existence now brought out again after a long period— 
this bachelor holds all this together with»his two arms and “ 
can never pick up any unimportant chance object without 
losing two others of tus own. The truth, naturally, lies in 
.s'-his,jthe truth that is nowhere so clearly to be seen. For 
whoever appears as a complete citizen, that li, travels over 
. the sea in a ship with foam before him and wake behind, 
that is, with much effect round about, quite different from 
the man in the waves on a few planks of wood that everl 
bump against and submerge each other— he, this gentleman 
and citizen, is in no lesser danger. For he and his property 
are not one, but two, and whoever destroys the connection 
destroys him at the same time. In this respect we and our 
acquaintances are indeed unlmowable, for we are entirely 
concealed, I, for instance, am now concealed by my pro- 
fession, by my imagined or actual sufferings, by literary in- 
clinations, etc., etc. But it is just I who feel my depth 
much too often and much too strongly to be able to be even 
only halfway satisfied. And tins depth I need but feel 
•uninterruptedly for a quarter of an hour and the poisonous 
world flows into my mouth hke water into that of a drown- 
ing man. 

“There is at the ipoment scarcely any difference between 
me and the bachelor,’only that I can still think of my youth 
in the village and perhaps, if I want to, perhaps even if my 
situation alone demands it, can throw myself back there. 

' The bachelor, howevef, has nothing before him and there- 
fore nothing, behind him. At the moment there is no differ- 
ence, but the bachelor has only the moment. He went astray 
at that time— which no one can know today, for nothing 
can be so annihilated as that tune— he went astray at that 



IFRANZ KAFKA 


i6 


1 


time whei} he felt lus depth lastingly, the way one sud- 
denly notices a n ulcer on one’s body that until this moment 
was the least thing on one’s body— yes, not even the least, 

‘ for It appeared nol yet to exist and now is more than every- 
thing else that we had bodily owned since our birth. If until 
now our whole person had Jieen oriented upon the work of 
our hands, upon that which was seen by our eyes, heard by 
our ears, upori the steps made by our feet, now we suddenly 
turn ourselves entirely in the opposite direction, like a 
weather vane in the mountains. 

''Now, instead of having run away at that moment, even 
in this latter direction, for only running away could have 
kept hyn on the tips of his toes and only the tips of his 
toes could have kept him on the earth, mstead of that he 
lay down, as children now and then lie down in the snow in 
■^dnter in order to freeze to death. He and these children, 
they know of course that it is their faultjor havi^ lam 
down or yielded in some other way, they know tlia^*diey 
should not have done it at any cost, but they cannot know 
that after the transformation that is taking place in them 
on the fields or in the cities they will forget every former 
fault and every compulsion and that they will move about i 
in the new element as if it were their first. But forgetting is 
not the right word here The memory of this man has suf- 
fered as little as his imagination. But they just cannot move 
mountains, the man stands once and for all outside our 
people, outside our humamty, he is continually starved, he 
has only the moment, the everlasting moment of tormen t 
which is followed by no glimpse of ‘a moment of recovery, 
he has only one thing always mis paihL in all the circumfer- 
ence of the world no secono'thin^that could serve as a 
medicine, he has only as much ground as his two feet take 
up, only as much of a hold as his two hands encompass, so 



DIARIES 1910 27 

much the less, therefore, than the trapeze artist Irl a variety 
show, who still has a safety net hung up for him below. 

“We others, we, mdeed, are held in our past and future., 
We pass almost all our leisure and how much of our work 
in letting them bob up and down in the balance. Whatever 
advantage the future has in sizfc, the past compensates for 
"In •vP'eight, and at their end the two are mdeed no longer 
distinguishable, earliest youth later becomes distmct, as the 
future IS, and the end of the future is really already experli- 
enced in all our sighs, and thus becomes the' past. So this 
circle along whose rim we move almost closes. Well, this 
circle indeed belongs to us, but belongs to us only so long 
as wc keep to it, if we move to the side just once,’ in any 
chance forgetting of self, in some distraction, some fright, 
some astomshment, some fatigue, we have already lost it 
into space, until now we had our noses stuck into the tide 
of the times, now we step back, former swimmers, present 
walkers, and are lost. We are outside the law, no one knows 
it and yet everyone treats us accordingly.” 

“You mustn’t think of me now. And how can you want 
to compare yourself with me^ I have been here in the city 
for more than twenty years already. Can you even imagine 
what that means’ I have spent each season here twenty 
tifties.”— Here he shook his slack fist over our heads.— “The 
trees fiave been grovdng here for twenty years, how small 
should a person become under them And all these nights, 
you know, in all the houses. Now you lie against this, now 
against that wall, so that the window keeps moving around 
you. And these mornings, you look out of the window, 
move- the cKair away from the bed and sit down to coffee. 
And these evfenings, you prop up your arm and hold your 
ear in’’ your hand. Yes, if only that weren’t all' If only you 
at least acquired a few new habits such as you can see here 



( 

28 


FKj'NZ KAFKA 


in the stfeets every day.— Now it perhaps seems to you as 
though I wanted to complain about it^ But no, why com- 
plain about It, after all neither the one nor the other is 
permitted me. I must just take my walks and that must be 
sufficient, but in compensation there is no place in all the 
world where I could not take my walks. But now it looks 
again as though I were being vain of it.” 

“I have It easy, then. I shouldn’t have stopped here in 
front of the house.” 

“T herefore don’t compare yourself in that with me and 
don’t let me make you doubtful. You are after all a grown 
man, are besides, as it seems, fairly forsaken here in the 
city.” ' 

I am indeed close to being so. Already, what protected 
\me seemed to dissolve here in the city. I was beautiful in 
the early days, for this dissolution takes place as an apotheo- 
sis, in which everything that holds us to life flies aw^, but 
even in flying away illumines us for the last time with its 
humaiTIIght. So I stand before my bachelor and most prob- 
ably he loves me for it, but without himself really knowing 
why. Occasionally his words seem to indicate that he knows 
himself thoroughly, that he knows whom he has before; 
him and that he may therefore allowTiimself anything. No, 
it is not so, however. He would rather meet everyone .-his 
same way, for he can live only as a hermit or a parasite. He 
is a hermit only by compulsion, once this compulsion is 
overcome by forces unknown to him, at once he is a para- 
site who behaves insolently whenever he possibly can. Of 
course, nothing in the world can save him any longer and 
so his conduct can make one think of the" corpse of a 
drowned man which, borne to the surface by some current, 
bumps against a tired swimmer, lays its hands upon him and 



DIARIES I^IO 29 

would bke to hold on. The corpse does not come' alive, in- 
deed IS not even saved, but it can pull the man down. 

I 

“You,” I said, and gave him a little shove with my knee 
(at this sudden utteraice some sahva flew from my mouth 
as an evil omen), “now you’re falhng asleep.” 

“rhaven’t forgotten you,” he said, and sljook his head 
while he was still opening his eyes. 

“I wasn’t afraid of it either,” I said. I ignored his smile’ 
and looked down on the sidewalk. “I just wanted to 
you that now, come what may, I am going up. For, as you 
know, I have been invited up there, it is already late and 
the csmpany is waiting for me Perhaps some arrangements 
have been put off until I come. I don’t insist it is so, but it is 
always possible You will now ask me whether I could not 
perhaps forgo the company altogether ” 

“I Ai^on’t, for in the first place you are burning to tell me, 
and in the second place it doesn't interest me at all, down 
here and up there are all the same to me Whether I lie 
here in tlie gutter and stow away the rain water or drmk 
champagne up there with the same lips makes no difference 
to me, not even in the taste, for which, besides, I easily con- 
sole myself, for neither the one nor the other is permitted 
me and therefore it is not nght for me to compare myself 
to you. And you' How long really have you been in the 
city? How long have you been m the city, I ask^*” 

“Five months. But still, I know it well enough already. 
You, I have given myself no rest. When I look back like 
this I don’t kno\y at all whether there have been any nights, 
everything looks to me, can you imagine, like one day with- 
out any mornings, •afternoons and evenings, even without 
any differences in light.” 



3° 


FRANZ KAFKA 


NoverAber 6. Lecture by a Madame Ch. on Musset. Jew- 
ish women’5 habit of hp-smacking. Understand French 
, through all the preluninaries and complications of the 
anecdote, until, right before the last word, which should 
hve on in the heart on the rums of thr whole anecdote, the 
French disappears before® our eyes, perhaps we have 
strained ourselves too much up to that point, the people 
who understand French leave before the end, they have al- 
ready heard enough, the others haven’t yet heard nearly 
enou gh, acoustics of the hall which favor the coughing in 
the boxes more than the words of the lecturer Supper at 
Rachel’s, she is reading Racine’s Phedre with Musset, the 
book lies between them on the table upon which in .addi- 
tion there is everything else imaginable lying. 

Consul Claudel,® brilhance in his eyes, which his broad 
face picks up and reflects, he keeps wanting to say goodbye, 
he succeeds in part too, but not entirely, for when he says 
goodbye to one, another os standing there who is joined 
again by the one to whom goodbye has already been said. 
Over the lecture platform is a balcony for the orchestra. 
All possible sorts of noise disturb. Waiters from the corri- 
dor, guests in their rooms, a piano, a distant string orchestra, ' 
hammering, finally a squabble that is irritating because of 
the difiiculty of telling where it is taking place. In a box a 
lady with diamonds in her earrings that sparkle almost un- 
interruptedly. At the box ofiice young, black-clothed peo- 
ple of a French Circle. One of them makes a sharp bow in 
greeting that causes his eyes to sweep across the floor. At 
the same time he smiles broadly. But he does this only be- 
fore girls, immediately after he looks the men straight in 
the face with his mouth solemnly pursed, by which he at 
the same time declares the former greeting to be p&rhaps 
a ridiculous but in any case unavoidable ceremony. 



31 


DIARIES 1910 

• • 

November 7. Lecture by Wiegler ® on Hebbel. Sits on 
the stage against a set representing a modern rodm as if his 
beloved will bound in through a door to iegin the play at 
last. No, he lectures. Hunger of Hebbel. Complicated rela- 
tionship with Elisa Lensing. In school he has an old maid 
/or a teacher who smokes, takes snuff, thrashes, and gives 
the good ones raisins He travels everywhere (iHeidelberg, 
Mumch, Pans) with no real apparent purpose. Is at first a 
servant of a parish bailiff, sleeps in the same bed with the 
coachman under tlie steps. 

Juhus Schnorr von Carolsfeld— drawing by Friedrich 
Ohviei^ he is sketching on a slope, how pretty and earnest 
he IS there (a high hat like a flattened clown’s cap with a 
stiff, narrow brim extends over his face, curly, long hair, 
eyes only for his picture, quiet hands, the board on his 
knees, Une foot has slipped down a little on the slope). But 
no, that is Friedrich Olivier, drawn by Schnorr. 

10 o’clock* November 15 . 1 will not let myself become 
tired. I’ll jump into my story even though it should cut my ’ 
face to pieces. 

12 o’clock, November 16. I’m reading Iphigenie attf 
Tauris. Here, aside frohi some isolated, plainly faulty pas- 
sages, the dried-up German language in the mouth of a pure 
boy is really to be regarded with absolute amazement. The 
verse, at the moment of fading, lifts every word up to the 
heights where^it stands in perhaps a thin but penetrating 
light. 

November ^7! Bernhard Kellermann read aloud. “Some 
unpublished things from my pen,” he began. Apparently a 



FKANZ KAFKA 


32 

kind person, an almost gray brush of hair, painstakingly 
close-shaven, a sharp nose, the flesh over his cheekbones 
often ebbs and flows lilte a wave. He is a mediocre writer 
with good passages (a man goes out into the corridor, 
coughs and looks around to see if Anyone is there), also an 
honest man who wants to read what he promised, but the 
audience wouldn’t let him, because of the fright caused by 
the first story about a hospital for mental disorders, be- 
cause of the boring manner of the reading, the people, 
. 'Respite the story’s cheap suspense, kept leaving one by one 
with as much zeal as if someone were reading next door. 
When, after the first third of the story, he drank a little 
mineral water, a whole crowd of people left. He was fright- 
ened “It is almost finished,” he lied outright When he was 
fimshed everyone stood up, there was some applause that 
sounded as though there were one person in the midst of 
all the people standing up who had remained sea^ied and 
was clapping by himself. But Kellermann still wanted to 
read on, another story, perhaps even several. But all he 
could do against the departing tide was to open his mouth. 
Finally, after he had taken counsel, he said, “I should stdl 
like very much to read a little tale that will take only fifteen 
minutes. I will pause for five minutes.” Several still re- 
mained, whereupon he read a tale containing passages that 
I'^ere justification for anyone to run out from the farthest 
1. point of the hall right through the middle of and over the 
whole audience. 

December 15 . 1 simply do not believe the conclusions I 
have drawn from my present condition, which has already 
lasted almost a year, my condition is too serious for that. 
Indeed, I do not even know whether I carl say that it is not 
a new condition. My real opimon, however, is that this 



DIARIES i9qo ^ 33 

condition is new— I have had similar ones, but ilever one 
lilte this. It is as if I were made of stone, as if I were my own 
tombstone, there is no loophole for doubt or for faith, for 
love or repugnance, for courage or anxietp^, in particular or 
in general, only a vagfte hope lives on, but no better than 
the inscriptions on tombstones Almost every word I write 
jars a'^ainst the next, I hear the consonants rub leadenly 
against each other and the vowels sing an accompaniment 
like Negroes m a minstrel showVMy doubts stand in a cir-* 
cle around every word, I see mem before I see the word, 
but what then' I do not see the word at all, I invent it. Of 
course, that wouldn’t be the greatest misfortune, only I 
ought«to be able to invent words capable of blowing the 
odor of corpses in a direction other than straight into mine 
and the reader’s face. When I sit down at the desk I feel no 
better than someone who falls and breaks both legs in the 
middle of the traffic of the Place de I’Op^ra. All the car- 
riages, despite their noise, press silently from all directions 
in all directions, but that man’s pain keeps better order than 
the police, ir closes his eyes and empties the Place and the 
streets without the carriages having to turn about. The 
great commotion hurts him, for he is really an obstruction 
to traffic, but the emptiness is no less sad, for it unshackles 
his f eal pain 

December i6. I won’t give up the diary again. I must 
hold on here, it is the only place I can. 

I would gladly explain the feeling of happiness which, 
like now, I have. within me from time to time. It is really 
something effervescent that fills me completely with a light, 
pleasant quivet and*that persuades me of the existence of 
abilities of whose nonexistence I can convince myself with 
pomplete certainty at any moment, even now. 



34 


F1.ANZ KAFKA 


Hebbbl praises Justinus Kemer’s Reiseschatten. “And a 
book like this hardly exists, no one knows it.” 

j 

Die Strasse der V erlassenbeit by W. Fred. How do such 
books get written^ A man who otV a small scale produces 
something fairly good hire blows up his talent to the size 
of a novel iri so pitiful a manner that one becomes i’ll even 
if one does not forget to admire the energy with which he 
misuses his own talent. 

This pursuit of the secondary characters I read about in 
novels, plays, etc. This sense of belonging together which 
I then have! In the Jungfem vom Btschofsberg (is that the 
titled ), there is mention made of two seamstresses who sew 
the hnen for the play’s one bride. What happens to these 
two girlsf Where do they hve> What have they done that 
they may not be part of the play but stand, as it wefe, out- 
side in front of Noah’s ark, drowning in the downpour of 
rain, and may only press their faces one last time against a 
cabin window, so that the audience in the orchestra sees 
something dark there for a moment? ^ 

December 17. Zeno, pressed as to whether anything is 
at rest, rephed. Yes, the flying arrow rests. 

If the French were German in their essence, then how 
the Germans would admire them! 

That I have put aside and crossed out so much, indeed 
almost everything I wrote this year, that hinders me a great 
deal in writing. It is indeed a mountam', it is five times as 
much as I have in general ever written, and by its mass alone 



DIARIES ipikO 35 

it draws everything diat I write away from undentay pen 
to Itself. 

December i8. If it were not absolutely ^certain that she 
reason why I permit lesters (even those that may be fore- 
^ seen to have insignificant contents, like this present one) to 
he linflpened for a time is only weakness and cowardice, 
which hesitate as much to open a letter as they would hesi- 
tate to open the door of a room in which someone, already 
impatient, perhaps, is waiting for me, then one could ex- 
plain this allowing of letters to he even better as thorougfi- 
ness. That is to say, assuming that I am a thorough person, 
then I must attempt to protract everything pertaining to 
the letter to the greatest possible extent, I must open it 
slowly, read it, slowly and often, consider it for a long 
time, prepare a clean copy after many drafts, and finally 
delay gven the mailing. All this hes within my power, only 
the sudden receipt of the letter cannot be avoided. Well, I 
slow even’that down in an artificial manner, I do not open 
it for a long time, it hes on the table before me, it continu- 
ously offers itself to me, continuously I receive it, but do 
not accept it. 

1 1*30 p.M. That I, so long as I am not freed of my office, 
*am simply lost, that is clearer to me than anything else, it is 
just a matter, as long as it is possible, of holding my head so 
high that I do not drown. How difficult that will be, what 
strength it will necessarily dram me of, can be seen already 
in the fact that today I did not adhere to my new time 
schedule, to be' at my desk from 8 to 1 1 p.m., that at present 
I even consider this as not so very great a disaster, that 
I have dhly has^y written down these few lines in order 
to^get into bed. 



FSANZ KAFKA 


36 

December 19. Started to work in the office. Afternoon 
at Max’s. 

Read a little in Goethe’s diaries. Distance already holds 
this hfe firm in tranquillity, these diaries set fire to it. The 
clarity of all the events makes it mysterious, just as a park 
fence rests the eye when looking at broad tracts of turf, 
and yet inspires inadequate respect in us. 

Just now my married sister ^ is coming to visit us for the 
first time. 

December 20. How do I excuse yesterday’s remark about 
Goethe (which is almost as untrue as the feeling it de- 
scribes, for the true feehng was driven away by my«sister).s 
In no way. How do I excuse my not yet having written 
anything today’ In no way. Especially as my disposition is 
not so bad. I have continually an mvocation in my ear. 
“Were you to come, invisible judgment! ” 

In order that these false passages which refuse to leave 
the story at any price may at last give me peace, I write 
down two here 

“His breathing was loud hke sighs in a dream, where un- 
happiness is more easily borne than in our world so that 
simple breathing can serve as sighs.” 

“Now I look him over as aloofly as one looks over a 
small puzzle about which one says to oneself- What does it 
matter if I cannot get the pellets into their holes, it all be- 
longs to me, after all, the glass, the case, the pellets, and 
whatever else there is; I can simply stick the whole affair 
into my pocket.” 

December 2 1 . Curiosities from Taten des-grosseti’Alexan- 
der by Michail Kusmin; 



DIARIES I91’0 ^ 37 

“Child whose upper half dead, lower alive, child's corpse 
with moving little red legs.” 

“The foul kings Gog and Magog, who wfre nourished on 
worms and flies, he drove into riven cliffs and sealed them 
in until the end of the i^^orld with the seal of Solomon.” 

“Rivers of stone, where in plate of water stones rolled 
wiffi a® great din past the brooks of sand that flow for three 
days to the south and for three days to the north.” 

* “Amazons, women with their right breasts burned away, 
short hair, male footgear.” 

“Crocodiles who with their urine burned down trees.” 


Was'at Baum’s,® so heard nice things. I, frail as before and 
always. To have the feeling of being bound and at the same 
time the other, that if one were unbound it would be even 
worse. 

December 22. Today I do not even dare to reproach my- 
sell. Shouted into this empty day, it would have a disgust- 
ing echo.. 


December 24 I have now examined my desk more 
closely and have seen that nothing good can be done on it. 
There is so much lying about, it forms a disorder without 
proportion and without that compatibility of disordered 
things which otherwise makes every disorder bearable. Let 
disorder prevail on the ^reen baize as it will, the same is 
true of the orchestras of old theaters. But that (December 
25) wads of old new,spapers, catalogues, picture postcards, 
letters, all partly ^orn, partly open, should stick out from 
the standing-room— the open pigeonhole under the center- 
piece— in the shape of a staircase, this unseemly state of af- 



FKANZ KAFKA 


38 

fairs spoils everything. Individual, relatively huge things in 
the orchestra appear in the greatest possible activity, as 
though It were.permissible for the merchant to audit his 
bobks in the theater, the carpenter to hammer, the oflScer 
to brandish his saber, the cleric to >speak to the heart, the 
scholar to the reason, the’ politician to the sense of citizen- 
ship, the loyers not to restrain themselves, etc. Oniy'the 
shaving mirror stands erect on my table, in the way it is 
used for shaving, the clothesbrusn lies with its bnsdes on 
the cloth, the wallet lies open in case I want to make a pay- 
• ment, from the key rmg a key sticks out in readiness and the 
tie still twines itself partly around the collar I have taken 
off. The next higher open pigeonhole, already hemmed in 
by the small closed drawers, is nothing but a lumber room, 
as though the first balcony of the auditorium, really the 
most visible part of the theater, were reserved for the most 
vulgar people, for old men-about-town in whom the dirt 
gradually moves from the inside to the outside, rude fellows 
who let their feet hang down over the balcony railing. 
Families with so many children that one merely glances at 
them without being able to count them here set up the 
filth of poor nurseries (indeed, it is already running into 
the orchestra), in the dark background sit the incurably 
sick, fortunately one sees them only when one shines a 
light in there, etc. In this pigeonhole he old papers that I 
should long ago have thrown away if I had a waste-paper 
basket, pencils with broken points, an empty match-box, a 
paperweight from Karlsbad, a ruler with an edge the un- 
evenness of which would be awful even for a country road, 
a lot of collar buttons, used razor blades (for these there 
is no place in the world), tie clips and still another heavy 
iron paperweight. In the pigeonhole above-- — 

Wretched, wretched, and yet with good intentions. It 



DIARIES I9{0 39 

is midnight, but since I have slept very well, th^t is an 
excuse only to the extent that by day I would have written 
nothing. The burning electric bght, the silent house, the 
darkness outside, the last waking momenis, they give jne 
the right to write even jjf it be only the moSt miserable stuff. 
And this right I use hurriedly. T aat’s the person I am. 

* a 

December 26. Two and a half days I was, 'though not 
completely, alone, and a}ready I am, if not transformed, at 
any rate on the way. Being alone has a power oyer me that 
never fails My interior dissolves (for the time being only 
' superficially) and is ready to release what hes deeper. A 
slight ordering of my interior begins to take place and I 
need nothing more, for disorder is the worst thing^in small 
talents. 

December 27. My strength no longer suffices for another 
senteace. Yes, if it were a question of words, if it were 
sufficient to set down one word and one could turn away 
in the calm consciousness of having entirely filled this word 
with oneself. 

* I slept part of the afternoon away, while I was awake I 
, lay on the sofa, thought about several love experiences of 
my ^outh, lingered in a pique over a neglected opportunity 
1 (at the^ime I was lyi^g m bed with a slight cold and my 
governess read me The Kreittzer Sonata, which enabled her 
):o enjoy my agitation), imagined my vegetarian supper, 
Vas satisfied with my digestion and worried whether my 
eyesight would last all my hfe. 

December 28. When I have acted hke a human being for 
a few hours, as. I did today with Max and later at Baum’s, 
I am already full of conceit before I go to sleep. 



40 


FR/lKZ KAFKA 

Januiy 3. “You,” I said, and then gave him a little shove 
with my knee, “I want to say goodbye.” At this sudden 
utterance some saliva flew from my mouth as an evil 
omen. 

“But you’ve been considering that for a long time,” he 
said, stepped away from die wall and stretched. 

“No, I haven’t been considering it at all.” 

“Then what have you been thinking about>” 

' “For the last time I have been preparing myself a little 
more for th'e company. Try as you may, you won’t under- 
stand that. I, an average man from the country, whom at 
any moment one could exchange for one of those who wait 
together by the hundreds in railroad stations for particular 
trains.” 

January 4. Qlmbe und Heimat by Schonherr. 

The wet fingers of the balconyites beneath me who wipe 
their eyes. 

January 6. “You,” I said, aimed, and gave 'him a little 
shove with my knee, “but now I’m going. If you want to 
see it too, open your eyes.” 

“Really, then^” he asked, at the same time looking at me 
from wide-open eyes with a direct glance that nevenheless 
was so weak that I could have fended it off with a wave of 
my arm. “You’re really gomg, then^ What shall I do^" I 
cannot keep you. And if I could, I still wouldn’t want to. 
By which I simply want to make clear to you your feehng 
that you could still be held back by me.” And immediately 
he assumed that inferior servants’ face by means of which 
they are permitted within an otherwise regulated state to 
make the children of their masters obedient or afraid. 



DIARIES I 9 n I 41 

January 7. N.’s sister who is so m love with li^r fiance 
that she maneuvers to speak with each visitor individually, 
since one can better express and repeat on^’s love to a single 
person. 

As though by magic, since neither external nor mtemal 
cuciijnstances— which are now more friendly than they 
have been for a year— prevented me, I was kept from writ- 
ing the entire hohday, ifis a Sunday —Several new percep- 
tions of the unfortunate creature that I am have dawned 
upon me consolingly. * 

January 12. I haven’t written down a great deal about 
myself during these days, partly because of laziness (I now 
sleep so much and so soundly during the day, I have greater 
weight while I sleep), but also partly because of the fear of 
berrying my self-perception. This fear is justified, for one 
should permit a self-p er cepQon to be established defini- 
tively in wnung only wKenit^an be done with the greatest 
completene^p, with all the incidental consequences, as well 
as with ^ire truthfulness For if this does not happen— and 
In any event I am not capable of it— then what is written 
down will, in accordance with its own purpose and with 
the superior power of the established, replace what has been 
felt only vaguely in such a way that the real feeling will 
disappear while the worthlessness of what has been noted 
down will be recognized too late. 

A few days ago Leonie Frippon, cabaret girl, Stadt Wien. 
Hair dressed in a bound-up mass of curls. Bad girdle, very 
old dress, but very pretty with tragic gestures, fliitterings 
of the eyelids, thrusts of the long legs, skilful stretching of 
the arms along the body, significance of the rigid throat 



FRIiNZ KAFKA 


42 

during ambiguous passages. Sang. Button Collection in the 
Louvre. 

Sehiller, as drawn by Schadow in 1804 in Berlin, where 
he had been greatly honored. One caianot grasp a face more 
firmly than by this nose. Tne partiDon of the nose is a little 
pulled down as a result of the habit of pulling on his liose 
while working. A friendly, somewhat hollow-cheeked per- 
' son whom the shaven face has probably made senile. 

January 14. Novel, Eheleute, by Beradt. A lot of bad 
Jewishness. A sudden, monotonous, coy appearance of the 
author, for instance All were gay, but one was present 
who was not gay Or: Here comes a Mr. Stern (whom we 
already know to the marrow of his novelistic bones). In 
Hamsun too there is something like this, but there it is as 
natural as the knots in wood, here, however, it drips into 
the plot like a fashionable medicine onto sugar. Odd turns 
of expression are clung to interminably, for instance: He 
was busy about her hair, busy and again busy. Individual 
characters, without being shown in a new light, are brought 
out well, so well that even faults here and there do not mat- 
ter. Minor characters mostly wretched. 

January 17. Max read me the first act of Abschted von 
der Jugend. How can I, as I am today, come up to this; I 
should have to look for a year before I found a true emo- 
tion in me, and am supposed, in the face of so great a work, 
in some way to have a right to remain seated in my chair in 
the coffeehouse late in the evening, plagued by the passing 
flatulence of a digestion which is bad in spite of everything. 

January 19. Every day, since I seem to be completely 



DlARIESl^IZ 

finished— during the last year I did not wake up for more 
than five nunutes at a time — shall either have to wish my- 
self off the earth or else, without my beirg able to see even 
the most moderate hope m it, I shall h^ve to start afresh 
hke a baby. Externalljr, this wjU be easier for me than be- j 
fore. For in those days I still strove with hardly a suspicion ’ 
after a description in which every word would be linked to 
my Lfe, which I would draw to my heart, and which would 
transport me out of myself. ^Vith what misery (of course,^ 
not to be compared with the present) I began! What a f liill 
pursued me all day long out of what I had written! How 
great the danger was and how uninterruptedly it worked, 
that Ldid not feel that chill at all, which indeed on the 
whole did not lessen my misfortune very much. 

Once I projected a novel in which two brothers fought j 
each other, one of whom went to Amenca while the other 
remained in a European prison. I only now and then began 
to write a few lines, for it tured me at once. So once I wrote 
down sofnethmg about my prison on a Sunday afternoon 
when we were visiting my grandparents and had eaten an 
especially soft kind of bread, spread with butter, that was 
customary there. It is of course possible that I did it mostly 
out of vamty, and by shifting the paper about on the table- 
clofli, tapping with my pencil, looking around under the 
lamp, wanted to tempf someone to take what I had written 
from me, look at it and admire me. It was chiefly the cor- 
ridor of the prison that was described in the few lines, 
above all its silence and^coldness, a sympathetic word was 
also said about the brother who was left behind, because 
he was J:he good brother. Perhaps I had a momentary feel- 
ing of the worthlessness of my description, but before that 
afterndon I never paid much attention to such feelings 
when among relatives to whom I was accustomed (my tim- 



FRiiNZ KAFKA 


44 

idity was so great that the accustomed was enough to make 
me halfway happy), I sat at the round table in the familiar 
room and could i?ot forget that I was young and called to 
great things out of this present tranquillity. An uncle who 
liked to make fun of peopl^nally tdbk the page that I was 
'holding only weakly, looked at it briefly, handed it back to 
me, even without laughing, and only said to the others'^ho 
were follou'ing him with their eyes, “The usual stuff,” to 
"me he said nothing. To be sure, I remained seated and bent 
as before over the now useless page of mine, but with one 
thrust I had in fact been bamshed from society, the )udg- 
' ment of my uncle repeated itself m me with what amounted 
almost to real sigmficance and even within the feeling of 
belonging to a family I got an insight into the cold space 
of our world which I had to warm with a fire that first I 
wanted to seek out. 

February 19 When I wanted to get out of bed this morn- 
ing I simply folded up. This has a very simple catise, I am 
completely overworked. Not by the office but my other 
work. The ofiice has an innocent share in it only to the 
extent that, if I did not have to go there, I could live calmly 
for my own work and should not have to waste these six 
hours a day which have tormented me to a degree that you 
cannot imagine, especially on Friday gnd Saturday, tecause 
I was full of my own things. In the final analysis, I know, 
that IS just talk, the fault is mine and the office has a right 
to make the most definite and justified demands on me. But 
for me in particular it is a horrible double life from which 
I there is probably no escape but insanity I write this in the 
good light of the morning and would certainly not write it 
if it were not so true and if I did not love you like at son. 

For the rest, I shall certainly be myself again by tomor- 



DIARIES l^II 45 

J 

row and come to the office where the first thing! hear will 
be that you want to have me out of your department. 

The special nature of my mspiration in which I, the ihost 
fortunate and unfortuhate of nj^n, now go to sleep at z a.m. 
(perhaps, if I can only bear the thought of it, it will re-' 
maili, for it is loftier than all before), is such that I can do 
everything, and not only what is directed to a definite piece 
'of work. When I arbitrarily wnte a single sentence, for in-' 
stance, “He looked out of the window,” it already has per- 
fection. 

“Will you stay here for a long time!* ” I asked At my sud- 
den utterance some saliva flew from my mouth as an evil 
omen. 

“Does it disuirb you’ If it disturbs you or perhaps keeps 
you .from going up, I will go away at once, but otherwise 
I should still like to remain, because I’m tired.” 

But finally he had every right to be satisfied too, and to 
become continually more satisfied the better I knew him. 
For he continually knew me even better, apparently, and 
*could certainly stick me, with all my perceptions, in his 
pocket For how otherwise could it be explained that I still 
reniained on the street as though no house but rather a fire 
were before me. When one is invited into society, one sim- 
ply steps into the house, chmbs the stairs and scarcely no- 
tices it, so engrossed is one in thought. Only so does one 
act correctly toward oneself and toward society.® 

February zb. Mella Mars in the Cabaret Lucerna. A witty 
tragedienne who so to speak appears on a stage turned 
wrong* side out in the way tragediennes sometimes show 
themselves behind the scenes, "l^en she makes her appear- 



FrAnZ KAFKA 


46 

ance she has a tired, indeed even flat, empty, old face, which 
constitutes* for all famous actors a natural beginning. She 
speaks very sharply, her movements are sharp too, begm- 
ning with the thuijib bent backward, which instead of bone 
, seems to be made of stiff ^er. Unfisual changeabihty of 
‘ her nose through the shifting highhghts and hollows of the 
playing muscles around it. Despite the eternal flashmg of 
her movements and words she makes her points delicately. 

I 

^mall cities also have small places to stroll about in. 

The young, clean, well-dressed youths near me on the 
promenade reminded me of my youth and thereforeimade 
an unappetizing impression on me. 

, Kleist’s early letters, twenty-two years old. Gives up sol- 
diering. They ask hun at home: Well, how are you going 
to earn a hving, for that was something they considered a 
matter of course. You have a choice of jurisprudence or 
political economy. But then do you have connections at 
court^ “I denied it at first in some embarrassment, but then 
declared so much the more proudly that I, even if I bad con- 
nections, should be ashamed, with my present ideas, to 
count on them. They smiled, I felt that I had been too hasty. 
One must be wary of expressing such truths.” 

February 2 1 . My life here is just as if I were quite certain 
of a second life, in the same way, for example, I got over the 
pain of my unsuccessful visit to Paris with the thought that 
I would try to go there again very soon. With this, the sight 
of the sharply divided hghts and shadows on the pavement 
of the street.^ 


For the length of a moment I felt myself clad in steeh 



DIARIES 19*11 47 

How far from me are— for example— my arm muscles. 

Marc Henry— Delvard. The tragic feeling bred m the 
audience by the empty hall increases the effect of the seri- 
ous songs, detracts froih that of the merry ones. Henry does 
the prologue, while Delvard, behind a curtain that she 
doesn’t know is translucent, fixes her haur. At poorly at- 
tended performances, W., the producer, seems to wear his 
Assyrian beard— which is otherwise deep black— streaked 
with gray. Good to have oneself blown upon by sucl^ a 
temperament, it lasts for twenty-four hours, no, not so 
long. Much display of costumes, Breton costumes, the un- 
dermost petticoat is the longest, so that one can count the 
wealth from a distance.— Because they want to save an ac- 
companist, Delvard does the accompaniment first, in a very 
low-cut green dress, and freezes.— Parisian street cries. 
Newsboys are omitted —Someone speaks to me, before I 
draw a breath I have been dismissed.— Delvard is ridiculous, 
she has thfe smile of an old maid, an old maid of the German 
cabaret. Widi a red shawl that she fetches from behind the 
curtain, she plays revolution. Poems by Dauthendey in the 
s*ame tough, unbreakable voice. She was charming only at 
the start, when she sat in a feminine way at the piano. At the 
song*“a BatignoUes” I felt Paris in my throat BatignoUes is 
supposed to live on its annuities, even its Apaches. Bruant 
wrote a song for every section of the city. 


• THE I;*RBAN WORLD 

Oscar M., an older student— if one looked at him closely 
one was frightened by his eyes— stopped short in the middle 
of a snoVstorm on an empty square one winter afternoon, 
in his winter clothes with his winter coat, over it a shawl 



FRANZ KAFKA 


48 

around his neck and a fur cap on his head. His eyes blinked 
reflectively. He was so lost in thought that once he took off 
his cap and stroked his face with its curly fur. Finally he 
seemed to have come to a conclusion and turned with a 
dancing movement onto Ks home\Vard path. 

When he opened the door to his parental living room he 
saw his father, a smooth-shaven man with a heavy, ^eshy 
face, seated at an empty table facing the door. 

“At last,” said the latter, when Oscar had barely set foot 
in the room. “Please stay by the door, I am so furious with 
you that I don’t knovir what I might do ” 

“But Father,” said Oscar, and became aware only when 
he spoke how he had been runmng. ■ 

“Silence,” shouted the father and stood up, blocking a 
window. “Silence, I say. And keep your ‘buts’ to yourself, 
do you understand?” At the same time he took the table in 
both hands and carried it a step nearer to Oscar. “I simply 
won’t put up with your good-for-nothing existence any 
longer. I’m an old man. I hoped you would be the comfort 
of my old age, instead you are worse than all my illnesses. 
Shame on such a son, who through laziness, extravagance, 
wickedness and— why shouldn’t I say so to your face— stu- 
pidity, drives his old father to his grave'” Here the father 
fell silent, but moved his face as though he were still speak- 
ing. 

“Dear Father,” said Oscar, and cautiously approached 
the table, “calm yourself, everything will be all right. To- 
day I have had an idea that will make an industrious person 
out of me, beyond all your expectations.” 

“How is that?” the father asked, and gazed toward a 
corner of the room. 

“Just trust me. I’ll explain everything to you at supper. 
Inwardly I was always a good son, but the fact that I could 



DIARIES 1911 ^ 49 

* 

not show It outwardly embittered me so, that I preferred to 
vex you if I couldn’t make you happy. But now' let me go 
for another short walk so that my thoughts may unfold 
more clearly.” > 

The father, who, becoming' attentive at first, had sat 
down on the edge of the table, stood up. “I do not beheve 
that what you just said makes much sense, I consider it 
only idle talk. But aftei; all you are my son. Come back 
early, we will hive supper at home and you can tell me all 
about this matter then.” 

“This small confidence is enough for me, I am grateful 
to you from my heart for it. But isn’t it evident in my very 
appearance that I am completely occupied with a serious 
matter^” 

“At the moment, no, I can’t see a thing,” said the father. 
“But that could be my fault too, for I have got out of the 
habff of looking at you at all.” With this, as was his custom, 
he called attention to the passage of time by regularly tap- 
ping on the surface of the table. “The chief thing, however, 
is that I no longer have any confidence at all in you, Oscar. 
?f I sometimes yell at you— when you came in I really did 
yell at you, didn’t P— then I do it not in the hope that it 
will improve you, I do it only for the sake of your pooi\ 
^ good mbther who perhaps doesn’t yet feel any immediate 
sorrow on your account, but is already slowly going to 
pieces under the strain of loeeping off such sorrow, for she 
thinks she can help you in some way by this. But after all, 
these are really things which you know very well, and out 
of consi/deratibn for myself alone I should not have men- 
tioned them again if you had not provoked me into it by 
your promises.” 

During these last words the maid entered to look after 



FRANZ KAFKA 


50 

the fire in me stove. She had barely left the room when 
Oscar cried out, “But Father! I would never have expected 
that. If in the past I had had only one httle idea, an idea for 
my dissertation, Ijet’s say, which has been lying m my trunk 
now for ten years and needs ideas like salt, then it is possi- 
ble, even if not probable, that, as happened today, I Avould 
have come running from my walk and said. ‘Father, by 
good fortune I have such-and-such an idea.’ If with your 
venerable voice you had then thrown into my face the re- 
proaches you did, my idea would simply have been blown 
away and I should have had to march off at once with some 
sort of apology or without one. Now just the contrary! 
Everything you say against me helps my ideas, they -do not 
stop; becoming stronger, they fill my head. I’ll go, because 
only when I am alone can I bring them into order.” He 
gulped his breath in the warm room. 

“It may be only a piece of rascality that you have m vour 
head,” said the father with his eyes opened wide in surprise. 
“In that case I am ready to believe that it has got hold of 
you. But if something good has lost its way into you, it will 
make its escape overmght. I know you.” 

Oscar turned his head as though someone had him by 
the throat. “Leave me alone now. You are worrying me 
more than is necessary. The bare possibility that you' can 
^orrectly predict my end should really not induce you to 
disturb me in my reflections. Perhaps my past gives you the 
right to do so, but you should not make use of it.” 

“There you see best how great your uncertainty must be 
when it forces you to speak to me so.” 

“Nothing forces me,” said Oscar, apd his neck twitched. 
He also stepped up very close to the table so that one could 
no longer tell to whom it belonged “What I said, I said 
with respect and even out of love for you, as you will see 



DIARIES I 9 I I 

later, too, for consideration for you and Mama* plays tEE* 
greatest part in my decisions.” 

“Then I must thank you nght now,” the father ^aid, “as j 
it IS indeed very improbable that your another and I will 
still be capable of it when the time comes.” 

“Please, Father, just let tomorrow sleep on as it deserves. ^ 
If you awaken it before its time, then you will have a sleepy 
today. But that your son must say this to you' Besides, I 
really didn’t intend to convince you yet, but only to break^ 
the news to you. And m that, at least, as you yourself must 
admit, I have succeeded.” 

“Now, Oscar, there is only one thing more that really 
makes me wonder, why haven’t you been coming to me 
often with something like this business of today. It corre- 
sponds so well with your character up to now. No, really, I , 
am bemg serious.” 

‘^es, wouldn’t you have thrashed me, then, instead of 
listemng to me? I ran home, God knows, in a hurry to give 
you a lit'tle pleasure. But I can’t tell you a thing as long as 
my plan is not complete Then why do you punish me for 
my good intentions and demand explanations from me that 
at this time might still injure the execution of my plan"” 

“Keep quiet, I don’t want to know a thing. But I have to 
answer you very quickly because you are retreating to- 
ward the door and apparently have something very urgent 
in hand- You have calmed my first anger with your trick, 
but now I am even sadder in spirit than before and therefore 
I beg you— if you insist, I can even fold my hands— at least 
say nothing to your mother of your ideas. Be satisfied with 
me.” • 

“This can’t be my father speaking to me,” cried Oscar, 
who already had his arm on the door latch. “Something has 
happened to you since noon, or I’m meeting a stranger now 



for the first tune in my father’s room My real father”— 
Oscar was silent for a moment with his mouth open— “he 
would certainly have had to embrace me, he would have 
ca^led my mother. What is wrong with you, Father^” 

“Then you ought to hayfe supper with your real father, I 
think. It would be more fun.” 

“He will come, you can be sure of that. In the end he 
can’t stay away. And my mother must be there. And Franz, 
whom I am now going to fetch. All.” Thereupon Oscar 
pressed his shoulder against the door— it opened easily— as 
though he were trying to break it down. 

Having arrived in Franz’s home, he bowed to the little 
landlady and said, “The Herr Engineer is asleep, I’ know, 
it doesn’t matter.” And without bothering about the wom- 
an, who because she was displeased by the visit walked aim- 
lessly up and down in the anteroom, he opened the glass 
door— it quivered under his hand as though it had been 
touched in a sensitive spot— and called, paying no heed to 
the interior of the room into which he could scarcely see, 
“Franz, get up. I need your expert advice. But I can’t stand 
it here in the room, we must go for a little walk, you muSi 
also have supper with us. Quick, then.” 

“Gladly,” said the engineer from his leather sofa, “but 
which first^ Get up, have supper, go for a walk, give adr, i 
vice? And some of it I probably haven’t caught.” 

“Most important, Franz, don’t joke. That’s the most im- 
portant thing, I forgot that.” 

“I’ll do you that favor at once. But to get up! I would 
rather have supper for you twice than get up once.” 

“Get up now! No arguments.” Oscar grabbed the weak 
man by the front of his coat and sat him up. 

“You’re mad, you know. With all due respect. Have I 



DIARIES I9<1[I 53 

ever pulled you off a sofa like that'” He wiped his dosed 
eyes with his two little fingers. 

“But Franz,” said Oscar with a grimace. “Get dressed 
now. After all, I’m not a fool, to have wa^ed you withput 
a reason.” 

“Just as I wasn’t sleeping without a reason, either. Yes- 
terday I worked the night shift, after that I’m done out of 
my afternoon nap, also because of you.” 

• “Why?” 

“Oh, well, it annoys me how little consideration you have 
for me. It isn’t the first time. Naturally, you are a free 
student and can do whatever you want. Not everyone is so 
fortunate. So you really must have some consideration, 
damn it! Of course, I’m your friend, but they haven’t taken 
my profession away yet because of that,” This he indicated 
by shaking his hands up and down, palm to palm. 

“But to judge by your present jabbering don’t I have 
to htlieve that you’ve had more than your fill of sleep?” 
said Oscar, who had drawn himself up against a bedpost 
whence he looked at the engineer as 
somewhat more time than before. 

• “Well, what is it you really want of me? Or rather, why 
did you wake me? ” the engineer asked, and rubbed his neck 
hard under his goatee in that more intimate relationship 
which one has to one’s body after sleep. 

“What I want of you,” said Oscar softly, and gave the 
bed a kick with the heel of his foot. “Very little. I already 
told you what I want while I was still in the anteroom: that 
you get dresse'd.” 

“If you want to point out by that, Oscar, that your news 
interests me very little, then you are quite right.” 

“Alhthe better. Then the interest my news will ki^le in 
you will bum entirely on its own account, without our 


though he now had 



FRIVNZ KAFKA 


54 

friendship adding to it. The information will be clearer 
too. I need.clear information, keep that m mind. But if you 
are perhaps looking for your collar and tie, they are lying 
there on the chair.” 

' “Thanks,” said the engineer, and started to fasten his 
0 collar and tie “A person can really depend on you after all.” 

March 26 Theosophic lectures by Dr. Rudolf Steiner, 
t Berlin. Rhetorical effect- Comfortable discussion of the ob- 
jections of opponents, the hstener is astonished at this strong 
opposition, further development and praise of these objec- 
tions, the listener becomes worried, complete immersion in 
these objections as though there were nothing else, the lis- 
tener now considers any refutation as completely impossible 
and is more than satisfied with a cursory description of the 
possibility of a defense. 

Continual looking at the palm of the extended hand — 
Omission of the period. In general, the spoken senttace 
starts off from the speaker with its initial capital letter, 
curves in its course, as far as it can, out to the audience, and 
returns with the period to the speaker. But if the period is 
omitted then the sentence, no longer held in check, falls- 
upon the listener immediately with full force. 

Before that, lecture by Loos and Kraus. 

In Western European stories, as soon as they even begin 
to include any groups of Jejws, we are now almost used im- 
mediately to hunting for and finding under or over the plot 
the solution to the Jewish question too In the Judinnen, 
however, no such solution is indicated, indeed not even 
conjectured, for just those characters who busy themselves 
with such questions stand farthest from the center of the 
story at a point where events are already revolving more 



' DIARIES I 9)1 I ' 55 

rapidly, so that we can, to be sure, still observe them closely, 
but no longer have an opportunity to get from tijem a calm 
report of their eflForts. Offhand, we recognize in this a fault 
m the story, and feel ourselves all the more entitled to sijch 
a criticism because today, since Ziomsm'came into being, 
the possibilities for a solution stand so clearly marshaled 
about the Jewish problem that the writer would have had 
to take only a few last steps in order to find the possibility 
of a solution suitable to his story. 

This fault, however, has still another origm..The Jiidm- 
Bew lacks non-Jewish observers, the respectable contrasting 
persons who in other stories draw out the Jewishness so 
that It advances toward them in amazement, doubt, envy, 
fear, and finally, finally is transfomied into self-confidence, 
but in any event can draw itself up to its full height only 
before them That is just what we demand, no other prin- 
ciple for the organization of this Jewish material seems 
jussified to us Nor do we appeal to this feeling in this case 
alone, it is universal in at least one respect. In the same way, 
too, the convulsive starting up of a lizard under our feet on 
a footpath in Italy delights us greatly, again and again we 
4ire moved to bow down, but if we see them at a dealer’s by 
hundreds crawling over one another in confusion in the 
largp bottles in which otherwise pickles are usually packed, 
then we don’t know what to do. 

Both faults unite into a third. The Judvnnen can do with- 
out that most prominent youth who usually, within his 
story, attracts the best to himself and leads it nicely along 
a radius to the borders*of the Jewish circle. It is just this 
that we will not accept, that the story can do without this 
youth, here we sense a fault rather than see it. 

March 28. P. KarUn the artist, his wife, two large, wide 



56 FRj\NZ KAFKA 

upper fiont teeth that gave a tapering shape to the large, 
rather flat /ace, Frau Hofrat B., mother of the composer, in 
whom old age so brings out her heavy skeleton that she 
looks hke a man, at least when she is seated. 

Dr. Sterner is so very much taken up with his absent dis- 
ciples. At the lecture the dead press so about him. Hunger 
for knowledge’ But do they really need it’ Apparently, 
though.— Sleeps two hours. Ever since someone once cut 
off his electric light he has always had a candle with him — 
He stood very close to Christ.— He produced his play in 
Munich (you can study it all year there and won’t under- 
stand It), he designed the costumes, composed the music.— 
He mstructed a chemist. Lowy Simon, soap dealer on Quai 
Moncey, Paris, got the best business advice from him. He 
translated his works into French. The wife of the Hofrat 
therefore has in her notebook, “How Does One Achieve 
Knowledge of the Higher Worlds’ ” At S. Lowy’s in 
Paris.” 

In the Vienna lodge there is a theosophist, sixty-flve years 
old, strong as a giant, a great drinker formerly, and a block- 
head, who constantly beheves and constantly has doubts. It 
is supposed to have been very funny when once, during c 
congress in Budapest, at a dmner on the Blocksberg one 
moonlit evening. Dr. Steiner unexpectedly joined the com- 
pany, in fear he hid behind a beer barrel with his beer mug 
(although Dr. Steiner would not have been angered by it). 

He is, perhaps, not the greatest contemporary psychic 
scholar, but he alone has been assigned the task of uniting 
theosophy and science. And that is why he knows every- 
thing too Once a botanist came to his native village, a great 
master of the occult. He enl^htened Iiim. 

That I would look up Dr. Steiner was interpreted to me 
by the lady as the beginning of recollection. The lady’s 



>DIARIESl9}l‘ 57 

doctor, when tlie first signs of influenza appeared in her, 
asked Dr. Steiner for a remedy, prescribed this for the lady 
and restored her to health with it immediately. A Frendi 
woman said goodbye to him with “Au revbir.” Behind her 
back he shook his head^. In two months she died. A similar 
case in Mumch. A Munich doctor cures people with colors 
decided upon by Dr Steiner He also sends mvalids to the 
picture gallery with instructions to concentrate for half an 
hour or longer before a pertam painting. 

End of the Atlantic world, lemuroid destrpetion, and 
now through egoism We hve in a period of decision. The 
efforts of Dr Steiner will succeed if only the Ahrimanian 
forces do not get the upper hand. 

He eats two liters of emulsion of almonds and fruits that 
grow in the air. 

He communicates with his absent disciples by means of 
thought-forms which he transmits to them without bother- 
ing,^urther about them after they are generated. But they 
soon weajr out and he must replace them. 

Mrs. F.: “I have a poor memory.” Dr. St.: “Eat no eggs.” 

I* 

M.Y VISIT TO DR. STEINER 

A v^ORiAN IS already waiting (upstairs on the third floor 
of the Victoria Hotel on Jungmannstrasse), but urges me 
to go in before her. We wait. The secretary arrives and 
gives us hope. I catch a glimpse of him down the hall. Im- 
mediately thereafter he comes toward us with arms half 
spread. The woman ei^plains that I was there first. So I 
walk behind him' as he leads me into his room His black 
Prince Albert which on those evenings when he lectures 
looks pplished (not polished but just shining because of its 
clean blackness) is now in the light of day (3 p.m.) dusty 



58 FS/AKZ KAFKA 

and even spotted, especially on the back and elbows. 

In his rponi I try to show my humility, which I cannot 
feel, by seeking out a ridiculous place for my hat, I lay it 
down on a small wooden stand for lacing boots. Table in 
the middle, I sit facing the window, he on the left side of 
the table On the table papers with a few drawings which 
recall those of the lectures dealing with occult physiology. 
An issue of the Annalen fur Naturphilosophie topped a 
small pile of the books which seemed to be lying about in 
other places as m ell. However, you cannot look around 
because he keeps trying to hold you with his glance. But if 
for a moment he does not, then you must watch for the re- 
turn of his glance He begins with a few disconnected sen- 
tences So you are Dr. Kafka’ Have you been interested in 
theosophy long’ 

But I push on with my prepared address I feel that a 
great part of my being is striving toward theosophy, but at 
the same time I have the greatest fear of it That is to ssy, I 
am afraid it will result in a new confusion which would be 
very bad for me, because even my present unhappiness con- 
sists only of confusion. This confusion is as follows: My 
happiness, my abilities and every possibility of being useful 
in any way have always been in the literary field And here 
I have, to be sure, experienced states (not many) which in 
my opinion correspond very closely to the clairvoyant 
states described by you, Herr Doktor, in which I com- 
pletely dwelt in every idea, but also filled every idea, and 
in which I not only felt myself at my boundary, but at the 
boundary of the human in general Only the calm of en- 
thusiasm, which IS probably characteristic of the clairvoy- 
ant, was still lacking in those states, even if not completely. 
I conclude this from the fact that I did not write the best of 
my works in those states. I cannot now devote myself com- 



' DIARIES igi’i 59 

pletely to this literary field, as would be necessary 'and in- 
deed for various reasons. Aside from my family relation- 
ships, I could not hve by hterature if only^ to begin with, 
because of the slow maturing of my work and its special 
character, besides, I aifl prevenfed also by my health and 
my character from devoting myself to what is, in the most 
favorable case, an uncertain life. I have therefore become an* 
ofllcial in a social insurance agency. Now these two profes- 
sions can never be reconciled with one another and admit 
a common fortune. The smallest good fortune- in one be- 
comes a great misfortune in the other. If I have written 
something good one evening, I am afire the next day m the 
office and can bring nothing to completion. This back and 
forth continually becomes worse. Outwardly, I fulfil my 
duties satisfactorily in the office, not my inner duties, how- 
ever, and every unfulfilled inner duty becomes a misfortune 
that never leaves. And to these two never-to-be-reconciled 
endeavors shall I now add theosophy as a third’ Will it not 
disturb both the others and itself be disturbed by both? 
Will I, at present already so unhappy a person, be able to 
carry the three to completion’ This is what I have come to 
S>k you, Herr Doktor, for I have a presentiment that if you 
consider me capable of this, then I can really take it upon 
mysolf. 

He listened very attentively without apparently looking 
at me at all, entirely devoted to my words. He nodded from 
time to time, which he seems to consider an aid to strict 
concentration. At first a quiet head cold disturbed him, his 
nose ran, he kept working his handkerchief deep into his 
nose, one finger at each nostril 

SincCiin contemporary Western European stories about 
Jews the reader has become used immediately to hunting 



FILaNZ KAFKA 


6o 

for and finding under or over the story the solution to the 
Jewish question too, and since in the Judinnen no such solu- 
tion is indicated or even conjectured, therefore it is possible 
that offhand the reader will recognize in this a fault of the 
Jvdirmen, and will look on only unwillingly if Jews go 
about in the bght of day without political encouragement 
from the past or the future. He must tell himself in regard 
to this that, especially since the rise of Zionism, the possi- 
bilities for a solution stand marshaled so clearly about the 
Jewish problem that in the end all the writer has to do is 
turn his body in order to find a definite solution, suitable to 
the part of the problem under discussion. 

May 27. Today is your birthday, but I’m not even send- 
ing you the usual book, for it would be only pretense; at 
bottom I am after all not even in a position to give you a 
book. I am writing only because it is so necessary for me 
today to be near you for a moment, even though it be 7nly 
by means of this card, and I have begun with the complaint 
only so that you may recognize me at once. 

August 1 5. The time which has just gone by and in which 
I haven’t written a word has been so important for me be- 
cause I have stopped being ashamed of my body in the 
swimming schools in Prague, Konigssaal and Czernoschitz. 
How late I make up for my education now, at the age of 
twenty-eight, a delayed start they would call it at the race 
track. And the harm of such a misfortune consists, perhaps, 
not in the fact that one does not Win, this is indeed only the 
still visible, clear, healthy kernel of the misfortune, pro- 
gressively dissolving and losing its boundaries, that drives 
one into the interior of the circle, when after all the circle 
should be run around. Aside from that I have also observed 



DIARIES 1911 61 

* 

a great m^y other things in myself during this period 
which was to some small extent also happy, and will try to 
write it down in the next few days. 

August 20 . 1 have th'fe unhappy behef that I haven’t the 
time for the least bit of good work, for I really don’t have 
time for a story, time to expand myself in every direction 
in the world, as I should have to do. But then I once more 

< j 

believe that my trip will turn out better, that I shall compre- 
hend better if I am relied by a httle writing, and so I try it 
again. 

From his appearance I had a suspicion of the exertions 
which he had taken upon himself for my sake and which 
now, perhaps only because he was tired, gave him this cer- 
tainty. A little more effort might have sufiiced and the de- 
ception would have succeeded, it succeeded perhaps even 
now. Did I defend myself, then’ Indeed, I stood stiff- 
necked here in front of the house, but— just as stiff-necked 
—I hesitated to go up. Was I waiting until the guests came 
to fetch irie with a song^' 

I have been reading about Dickens. Is it so difficult and 
can an outsider understand that you experience a story 
within yourself from its beginning, from the distant point 
up to the approaching locomotives of steel, coal and steam, 
and you don’t abandon it even now, but want to be pursued 
by it and haye time for it, therefore are pursued by it and 
of your own volition run before it wherever it may thrust 
and wherever you may lure it. 


I can’t understand it and can’t believe it. I live only here 
and there in a small word in whose vowel (“thrust” above, 



FRANZ KAFKA 


for instance) I lose my useless head for a moment. The first 
and last fetters are the beginning and end of my fishlike 
emotion. 

August 24. Sitting with acquairitances at a coffeehouse 
table in the open air and looking at a woman at the next 
table who has just arrived, breathing heavily beneath her 
heavy breasts, and who, with a heated, brownish, shining 
face, sits down. She leans her head back, a heavy down be- 
comes visible, she turns her eyes up, almost in the way in 
which she perhaps sometimes looks at her husband, who is 
now reading an illustrated paper beside her. If one could 
only persuade her that one may read at most a newspaper 
but never a magazine beside one’s wife in a coffeehouse. 
After a moment she becomes aware of the fulness of her 
body and moves back from the table a little. 

August 26. Tomorrow I am supposed to leave for ftaly. 
Father has been unable to fall asleep these evenings because 
of excitement, since he has been completely caught up in 
his worries about the business and in his illness, which they 
have aggravated. A wet cloth on his heart, vomiting, suffo- 
cation, walking back and forth to the accompaniment of 
sighs. My mother in her anxiety finds new solace lie was 
always after all so energetic, he got over’^everything, and 
now ... I say that all the misery over the business could after 
all last only another three months, then everything will 
have to be all right. He walks up and down, sighing and 
shalting his head It is clear that from h'S point of view his 
worries will not be taken from his shoulders and will not 
even be made lighter by us, but even from our point of view 
they will not, even in our best intentions there is still some- 
thing of the sad conviction that he must provide for hh 



DIARIES I 9 I I * 63 

a 

family.— By his frequent yawning or his poking into his 
nose (on the whole not disgusting) Father engenders a 
slight reassurance as to his condition, whicl# scarcely enters 
his consciousness, despite the fact that wb^n he is well Re 
usually does not do this-^Ottla cdhfirmed this for me'.— Poo^ 
Mother will go to the landlord tomorrow to beg.^^ ‘ 

It had already become a custom for the four friends, 
Robert, Samuel, Max and* Franz, to spend their short vaca- 
tions every summer or fall on a trip together During the 
rest of the year their friendship consisted mostly of the 
fact that they all four liked to come together one evening 
every week, usually at Samuel’s, who, as the most well-to- 
do, had a rather large room, to tell each other various 
things and to accompany it by drinking a moderate amount 
of beer. They were never firashed with the telling of things 
when they separated at midnight, since Robert was secre- 
tary* of an association, Samuel an employee in a business 
office, Max a civil service official and Franz an employee in 
a bank, almost everything that anyone had experienced in 
his work during the week was not only unknown to the 
other three and had to be told to them quickly, but it was 
also incomprehensible without rather lengthy explanations. 
But mfcre than anything else the consequence of the differ- 
ence of these professions was that each was compelled to 
describe his profession to the others again and again, since 
the descriptions (they were all only weak people, after all) 
were not thoroughly enough understood, and for that very 
reason and also out,of friendship were demanded again and 
again. 

Talk about women, on the other hand, was seldom en- 
gaged in' for even if Samuel for his part would have found 
it to his liking he was still careful not to demand that the 



($4 FRANZ KAFKA 

Mnversation adapt itself to his requirements, in this regard 
the old maid who brought up the beer often appeared to 
him as an admonition. But they laughed so much during 
these evenings that Max said on the way home that this 
eternal laughing is really to be regretted, because of it one 
forgets all the serious concerns of which everyone, after 
all, really has enough. While one laughs one thinks there is 
still time enough for seriousness. That isn’t correct, how- 
ever, for seriousness naturally makes greater demands on a 
person, and after all it is clear that one is also able to satisfy 
greater demands m the society of friends than alone. One 
should laugh in the office because there is nothing better 
to be accomplished there. This opinion was aimed at 
Robert, who worked hard in the art association he was put- 
ting new life into and at the same time observed in the old 
the most comical things with which he entertained his 
friends. 

As soon as he began, the friends left their places, stood 
around him or sat down on the table, and laughed so self- 
obliviously, espeaally Max and Franz, that Samuel carried 
all the glasses over to a side table. If they tired of talking 
Max sat down at the piano with suddenly renewed strength 
and played, while Robert and Samuel sat beside him on the 
bench, Franz, on the other hand, who understood nothing 
of music, stood alone at the table and looked through Sam- 
collection of picture postcards or read the paper. 
When the evenings became warmer and the window could 
be left open, all four would perhaps come to the window 
and with their hands behind their backs look down into the 
( street without letting themselves be diverted from their 
conversation by the light traffic outside. Now and’then one 
returned to the table to take a swallow of beer, or pointed 



D lARIES I 9 I I 65 

to the curls of two girls who sat downstairs in front of their 
wineshop, or to the moon that quietly surprised them, until 
finally Franz said it was getting cool, they .ought to close 
the window. 

In summer they sometimes met in a public garden, sat 
at a table off to one side where it was darker, drank to one 
another and, their heads together in conversation, hardly 
noticed the distant brass band. Arm in arm and in step, they 
then walked home through the park. The two on the out- 
side twirled their canes or struck at the shrubs, Robert 
called on them to sing, but then he sang alone, well enough 
for four, the other one in the middle felt himself made es- 
pecially comfortable by this. 

On one such evening, Franz, drawing his two neighbors 
more closely to him, said it was really so beautiful to be 
together that he couldn’t understand why they met only 
once a week when they could certainly arrange without 
difiiculty to see each other, if not often, then at least twice 
a week. They all were in favor of it, even the fourth one 
on the end, jvho had heard Franz’s soft words only indis- 
tinctly. A-pleasure of this sort would certainly be worth the 
slight effort which it would now and then cost one of them. 
It seemed to Franz as though he had a hollow voice as pun- 
ishment for speaking umnvited for all of them. But he did 
not stop. And if sometimes one of them couldn’t come, 
that’s his loss and he can be consoled for it the next time, 
but do the others then have to give each other up, aren't 
three enough for each other, even two, if it comes to that.!* 
Naturally, naturally, they all said. Samuel disengaged him- 
self from the end of the line and stood close in front of the 
three others, because in this way they were closer to each 
other. But then it didn’t seem so, and he preferred to link 
up with the others again. 



66 


FRANZ KAFKA 


Robert made a proposal. “Let’s meet every week and 
study Italian. We are determined to learn Italun, last year 
already we sav' in the little part of Italy where we were 
that our Italian was only sufficient to ask the way when we 
got lost, remember, among the vin'yard walls of the Cam- 
pagna. And even then it managed to do only thanks to the 
greatest efforts on the part of those we asked. We’ll have 
to study It if we want to go to Italy again this year. We 
simply have to. And so isn’t it best to study together^’’ 

“No,” said Max, “we shall learn nothing together. I am 
as certain of that as you, Samuel, are certain that we ought 
to study together.” 

“Am I* ” Samuel said. “We shall certainly learn very well 
together, I always regret that we weren’t together even at 
school. Do you realize that we’ve known each other only 
two years’ ” He bent forward to look at all three. They had 
slowed down their steps and let go their arms. 

“But we haven’t studied anything together yet,” said 
Franz. “I like it very well that way, too. I don’t want to 
learn a thing. But if we have to learn Italian, then it is bet- 
ter for each one to learn it by himself ” 

“I don’t understand that,” Samuel said. “First you want 
us to meet every week, then you don’t want it.” 

“Come now,” Max said. “Franz and I, after aU, just 'don’t 
want our being together to be disturbed by studying, or 
our studying by being together, nothing else.” 

“Yes,” said Franz. 

“And indeed there isn’t much time,” said Max. “It is June 
tiow and in September we want to leave.” 

“That’s the very reason why I want us to study to- 
gether,” Robert said, and stared in surprise at the two who 
opposed him. His neck became especially flexible when 
someone contradicted him.^^ 



DIARIES I 9 I I 67 

One thinks that one describes him correctly, but it is only 
approximate and is corrected by the diary. 

It probably lies in the essence of friendship and follows 
it like a shadow— one will welcome it, the second rfegret it, 
the third not notice it at all — 

September 26. The artist Kubin recommends Reguhn as 
a laxative, a powdered seaweed that swells up in the bowels, 
shakes them up, is thus effective mechanically' in contrast 
to the unhealthy chemical efifect of other laxatives which 
just tear through the excrement and leave it hanging on the 
walls of the bowels. 

He met Hamsun at Langen He (Hamsun) grins mock- 
ingly for no reason. During the conversation, without in- 
terrupting It, he put one foot on his knee, took a large pair 
of paper shears from the table and trimmed the frayed 
ed^es of his trousers. Shabbily dressed, with one or so 
rather expensive details, his tie, for example. 

Stories about an artist’s pension in Munich where paint- 
ers and veterinaries lived (the latters’ school was in the 
neighborhood) and where they acted in such a debauched 
way that the windows of the house across the way, from 
whidi a good view could be had, were rented out. In order 
to satisfy these spectators, one of the residents in the pen- 
sion would sometimes jump up on the window sill in the 
posture of a monkey and spoon his soup out of the pot. 

A manufacturer of fraudulent antiques who got the worn 
effect by means of buckshot and who said of a table: Now 
we must drink coffee on it three more times, then it can 
be shipped off to the Innsbruck Museum. 

Kubfti himself; very strong, but somewhat monotonous 
facial expression, he describes the most varied things with 



<$8 FRANZ KAFKA 

the same movement of muscles. Looks different in age, size 
and strength according to whether he is sitting, standing, 
wearing just a juit, or an overcoat. 

r 

September 27. Yesterday on thi: Wenzelsplatz met two 
girls, kept my eye too long on one while it was just the 
other, as it proved too late, who wore a plain, soft, brown, 
wrinkled, ample coat, open a httle in front, had a delicate 
rfiroat and delicate nose, her hair was beautiful in a way 
already forgotten.— Old man with loosely hanging trousers 
on the Belvedere. He whistles, when I look at him he stops; 
if I look away he begins again, finally he whistles even when 
I look at him.— The beautiful large button, beautifully set 
low on the sleeve of a girl’s dress. The dress worn beauti- 
fully too, hovering over American boots. How seldom I 
succeed in creating something beautiful, and this unnoticed 
button and its ignorant seamstress succeeded.— The woman 
talking on the way to the Belvedere, whose lively eyes', in- 
dependent of the words of the moment, contentedly sur- 
veyed her story to its end.— The powerful half-turn of the 
neck of a strong girl. 

September 29. Goethe’s diaries. A person who keeps 
none is in a false position in the face of a diary. When for 
example he reads in Goethe’s diaries: “1/11/1797. All day 
at home busy with various affairs,” then it seems to him 
that he himself had never done so little in one day. 

Goethe’s observations on his travels different from to- 
day’s because made from a mail-coach, and with the slow 
changes of the region develop more simply and can be fol- 
lowed much more easily even by one who does not know 
those parts of the country. A calm, so-to-speak pastoral 
form of thinldng sets in. Since the country offers itself un- 



DIARIES I 9 I I 69 

scathed in its indigenous character to the passengers in a 
wagon, and, since highways too divide the country much 
more naturally than the railway lines to vijhich they per- 
haps stand m the same relationship as do rivers to canals, so 
too the observer need do no violence to the landscape and 
he can see systematically without great eflFort. Therefore 
there are few observations of die moment, mostly only in- 
doors, where certam people suddenly and hugely bubble 
up before one’s eyes, for Instance, Austrian officers in Hei- 
delberg, on the other hand the passage about the men in 
Wiesenheim is closer to the landscape, “They wear blue 
coats and white vests ornamented with woven flowers” 
(quoted from memory). Much written down about the 
falls of the Rhine at Schaffhausen, in the middle in larger 
letters. “Excited ideas.” 

Cabaret Lucerna. Lucie Konig showing photographs 
with old hair-styles. Threadbare face. Sometimes, with her 
tumed-up' nose, with her arm held aloft and a turn of all 
her fingers, ^he succeeds in something. A milksop face.— 
Longen^® (the painter Pittermann), mimic jokes. A pro- 
duction that is obviously without )oy and yet cannot be 
considered so, for if it were, then it couldn’t be performed 
every evening, particularly since it was so unhappy a thing 
even at the moment it was created that no satisfactory pat- 
tern has resulted which would dispense with frequent ap- 
pearances of the whole person. Pretty jump of a clown over 
a chair into the emptiness of the wings. The whole thing 
reminds one’of a private production where, because of so- 
cial necessity, one vigorously applauds a wretched, insig- 
nificant performance in order to get something smooth and 
rounded from the minus of the production by means of the 
plus of the applause. 



70 FRANZ KAFKA 

The singer Vaschata. So bad that one loses oneself in his 
appearance. But because he is a powerful person he holds 
the attention of .the audience with an animal force of which 
certamly I am consciously aware. 

Grunbaum is effective with whar is apparently only the 
seeming mconsolability of his existence 

Odys, dancer. Stiff hips. Real fleshlessness. Red knees 
only suit the “Moods of Spring” dance. 

September 30. The girl in the adjoining room yesterday. 
I lay on the sofa and, on the pomt of dozing off, heard her 
voice. She seemed to me in my mind to be overdressed not 
only because of the clothes she wore, but also because of 
the entire room, only her shapely, naked, round, strong, 
dark shoulders which I had seen in the bath prevailed 
against her clothes. For a moment she seemed to me to be 
steaming and to be filling the whole room with her vapors 
Then she stood up in her ash-gray-colored bodice that 
stood off from her body so far at the bottom that one could 
sit down on it and after a fashion ride along. ,. 

More on Kubin The habit always of repeating in an ap- 
proving tone someone else’s last words, even if it appears 
from his own words added on that he by no meahs agrees 
with the other person. Provoking.— When you listen to his 
many stories it is easy to forget his importance. Suddenly 
you are reminded of this and become frightened. Someone 
said that a place we wanted to go to was dangerous, he said 
he wouldn’t go there, then; I asked him whether he was 
afraid to, and he answered (moreover, his arm was passed 
through mine) ; Naturally, I am young and have a lot in 
front of me yet. 

All evening he spoke often and— in my opinion— entirely 



DIARIES 1911 71 

seriously about my constipation and his. Toward midnight, 
however, when I let my hand hang over the edge of the 
table, he saw part of my arm and cried Bijt you are really 
sick. Treated me from then on even more indulgently aad 
later also kept off the ethers m4io wanted to talk me into 
going to the brothel with them. When we had already said 
goodbye he called to me again from the distance: “Reg- 
ulin!” 

Tucholsky and Szafranski The aspirated Berlin dialect in 
which the voice makes use of intervals consisting of “nich.” 
The former, an entirely consistent person of twenty-one. 
From the controlled and powerful swing of his walking 
stick that gives a youthful hft to his shoulders to the 
dehberate delight in and contempt for his own literary 
works. Wants to be a defense lawyer, sees only a few 
obstacles and at the same time how they may be overcome- 
hi? clear voice that after the manly sound of the first half 
hour of tklk pretends to become revealingly girlish— doubt 
of his own capacity to pose, which, however, he hopes to 
get with -more experience of the world— fear, finally, of 
"changing into a melancholic, as he has seen happen in older 
Berlin Jews of his type, in any event for the time being he 
sees ho sign of this He will marry soon. 

Szafranski, a disciple of Bernhardt’s, grimaces while he 
observes and draws in a way that resembles what is drawn. 
Reminds me that I too have a pronounced talent for meta- 
morphosing myself, which no one notices. How often I 
must have imitated Max Yesterday evening, on the way 
home, if I had observed myself from the outside I should 
have taken myself for Tucholsky. The ahen being must be 
in me, then, as distinctly and invisibly as the hidden object 



FRAKZ KAFKA 


7* 

in a picture-puzzle, where, too, one would never find any- 
thing if one did not know that it is there. When these 
metamorphoses take place, I should especially hke to be- 
heve m a dimnung of my own eyes. 

October i. The Altneu Synagogue yesterday. Kol 
Nidre.^® Suppressed murmur of the stock market. In the 
entry, boxes with the inscripuon: “Merciful gifts secretly 
left assuage the wrath of the bereft.” Churchly inside. 
Three pious, apparently Eastern Jews. In socks. Bowed 
over their prayer books, their prayer shawls drawn over 
their heads, become as small as they possibly can. Two are 
crying, moved only by the holy day. One of them may 
only have sore eyes, perhaps, to which he fleetmgly applies 
his stiU folded handkerchief, at once to lower his face to the 
text again. The words are not really, or chiefly, sung, but 
behind them arabesque-hke melodies are heard that spin 
out the words as fine as hairs. The httle boy without the 
slightest conception of it all and without any possibility of 
understanding, who, with the clamor in his ears, pushes 
himself among the thronging people and is pushed. The 
clerk (apparently) who shakes himself rapidly while he 
prays, which is to be understood only as an attempt at 
putting the strongest possible— even if possibly incompre- 
hensible— emphasis on each word, by means of which the 
voice, which in any case could not attain a large, clear em- 
phasis in the clamor, is spared. The family of a brothel 
owner. I was stirred immeasurably more deeply by Juda- 
ism in the Pinkas Synagogue. 

The day before the day before yesterday. The one, a 
Jewish girl with a narrow face— better, that tapers down 
to a narrow chin, but is loosened by a broad, wavy hair-do. 



' DIARIES 1911 ^ 73 

The three small doors that lead from the inside of the build- 
ing into thf salon. The guests as though in a police station 
on the stage, drinlcs on the table are scarcely touched. 

Several girls here dressed like the marionettes for chil- 
dren’s theaters that arj sold in, the Chrislfmas market, i.e., 
with ruchmg and gold stuck on and loosely sewn so that 
one can rip them with one pull and they then fall apart in 
one’s fingers. The landlady with the pale blond hair drawn 
tight over doubtless disgusting pads, with the sharply 
slanting nose the direction of which stands in some sort of 
geometric relation to the sagging breasts and the stiffly 
held belly, complains of headaches which are caused by the 
fact that today, Saturday, there is so great an uproar and 
there is nothing in it. 

More on Kubin The story about Hamsun is suspect. 
One could tell such stories as one’s own experiences by the 
tljpusand from his works. 

More on Goethe “Excited ideas” are only the ideas 
which the Rhine falls excite. One sees this from a letter to 
, Schiller.— The isolated momentary observation, “Castanet 
rhythms of the children m wooden shoes,” made such an 
impression, is so universally accepted, that it is unthinlcable 
that anyone, even if he had never read this remark, could 
feel this observation as an original idea. 

October 2. Sleepless night. The third in a row. I fall 
asleep soundly, but after an hour I wake up, as though I 
had laid my head in the wrong hole. I am completely awake, 
have tl)e feeling that I have not slept at all or only under a 
thin skin, have before me anew the labor of falling asleep 
and feel myself rejected by sleep. And for the rest of the 
night, until about five, thus it remains, so that indeed I sleep 



FRANZ KAFKA 


but at the same time vivid dreams keep me awake. I sleep 
alongside myself, so to speak, while I myself must struggle 
with dreams. Ajjout five the last trace of sleep is exhausted, 
I )ust dream, w hich is more exhausting than wakefulness. 
In short, I spend the whole night m that state in which a 
healthy person finds himself for a short time before really 
falhng asleep. When I awaken, all the dreams are gathered 
about me, but I am careful not to reflect on them Toward 
mormng I sigh into the pillow, because for this night all 
hope IS gone 1 think of those nights at the end of which 1 
was raised out of deep sleep and awoke as though 1 had 
been folded in a nut. 

The horrible apparition last night of a blind child, ap- 
parently the daughter of my aunt in Leitmeritz who, how- 
ever, has no daughter but only sons, one of whom once 
broke his leg On the other hand there were resemblances 
between this child and Dr. M ’s daughter who, as 1 have 
recently seen, is in the process of changing from a pretty 
child into a stout, stiffly dressed little girl This blind or 
weak-sighted child had both eyes covered by a pair of eye- 
glasses, the left, under a lens held at a certain distance from 
the eye, was milky-gray and bulbous, the other receded and 
was covered by a lens lying close against it. In order that 
this eyeglass might be set in place with optical correctness 
it was necessary, instead of the usual support going back of 
the ears, to make use of a lever, the head of which could 
be attached no place but to the cheekbone, so that from this 
lens a little rod descended to the cheek, there disappeared 
'into the pierced flesh and ended on the bone, while another 
small wire rod came out and went back over the ear. 

I believe this sleeplessness comes only because I write. 
For no matter how little and how badly I write, I am 
still made sensitive by these minor shocks, feel, espe- 



DIARIES I9I I 75 

daily toward evening and even more in the morning, the 
approaching, the imminent possibihty of greaf moments 
which would tear me open, which could make me capable 
of anything, and in the general uproar that is withm me 
and which I have no time to command, find no rest. In the 
end this uproar is only a suppressed, restramed harmony, 
which, left free, would fill me completely, which could 
even widen me and yet still fill me But now such a moment 
ai'ouses only feeble hopes and does me harm, for my 
bemg does not have sufiicient strength or the capacity to 
hold the present mixture, durmg the day the visible world 
helps me, during the night it cuts me to pieces unhindered. 
I always think in this connection of Pans, where at the 
time of the siege and later, until the Commune, the popula- 
tion of the northern and eastern suburbs, up to that time 
strangers to the Parisians, for a period of months moved 
through the connecting streets into the center of Paris, 
dawdhng like the hands of a clock. 

My cohsolation is— and with it I now go to bed— that I 
have not wyitten for so long, that therefore this writing 
could find no right place withm my present circumstances, 
"that nevertheless, with a little fortitude. I’ll succeed, at least 
temporarily 

I 'A^as so weak today that I even told my chief the story 
of the child I remembered that the eyeglasses in the dream 
derive from my mother, who in the evening sits next to me 
and while plaving cards looks across at me not very pleas- 
antly under her eyeglasses. Her eyeglasses even have, 
which I do not remember having noticed before, the right 
lens nearer the eye than the left. 

October 3. The same sort of night, but fell asleep widi 
even more difficulty. While falling asleep a vertically mov- 



FRANZ KAFKA 


76 

ing pain in my head over the bridge of the nose, as though 
from a wnnkle too sharply pressed into my forehead. To 
make myself as heavy as possible, which I consider good for 
falling asleep, I had crossed my arms and laid my hands on 
my shoulders, so that I lay there like a soldier with his pack. 
Again It was the power of my dreams, shining forth into 
wakefulness even before I fall asleep, which did not let me 
sleep. In the evening and the morning my consciousness of 
the creative abilities in me is more than I can encompass. I 
feel shaken to the core of my being and can get out of my- 
self whatever I desire. Calhng forth such powers, which are 
then not permitted to function, reminds me of my relation- 
ship with B Here too there are effusions which are not re- 
leased but must instead spend themselves in being repulsed, 
but here— this is the difference— it is a matter of more mys- 
terious powers which are of an ultimate sigmficance to me. 

On the Josefsplatz a large touring car with a family sit- 
ting crowded together drove by me In the wake of the 
automobile, with the smell of gas, a breath of. Paris blew 
across my face. 

While dictating a rather long report to the district Chief 
of Pohce, toward the end, where a chmax was intended, 
I got stuck and could do nothing but look at K., the typist, 
who, in her usual way, became especially lively, moved her 
chair about, coughed, tapped on the table and so called the 
attention of the whole room to my misfortune The sought- 
for idea now has the additional value that it will make her 
be quiet, and the more valuable it becomes the more diffi- 
cult it becomes to find it. Finally I have the word “stigma- 
tize” and the appropriate sentence, but still hold it allin my 
mouth with disgust and a sense of shame as though it were 



DIARIES I 9 II 77 

raw meat, cut out of me (such effort has it cost me). Fi- 
nally I say It, but retain the great fear that everything 
within me is ready for a poetic work and such a work would 
be a heavenly enlightenment and a real conjmg-ahve for me, 
while here, in the officfc, becauSe of so wretched ah official 
document, I must rob a body capable of such happiness of 
a piece of its flesh. 

October 4 . 1 feel restfess and vicious. Yesterday, before 
falhng asleep, I had a flickering, cool htde flame up in the 
left side of my head. The tension over my left eye has al- 
ready settled down and made itself at home. When I think 
about It, it seems to me that I couldn’t hold out in the office 
even if they told me that in one month I’d be free. And most 
of the time in the office I do what I am supposed to, am 
quite calm when I can be sure that my boss is satisfied, and 
do not feel that my condition is dreadful. By the way, last 
nl|;ht I purposely made myself dull, went for a walk, read 
Dickens, then felt a little better and had lost the strength for 
sorrow. I sail regarded the sorrow as justified but it seemed 
^ to have withdrawn somewhat, I looked at it from a distance 
and therefore hoped for better sleep. It was a little deeper 
too, but not enough, and often interrupted. I told myself, 
as consolation, that I had indeed once more repressed the 
great agitation in me but that I did not wish to succumb at 
once, as I had always done m the past after such occasions; 
rather, I wished to remain entirely conscious of the final 
flutterings of that agitation, which I had never done before. 
Perhaps in this way I would find hidden steadfastness in 
myself.' 


Toward evening, in the dark of my room on the sofa. 
Why does one take a rather long time to recognize a color. 



78 I FRANZKAFKA 

but then, after the understanding has reached the decisive 
turning pliint, quickly become all the more convinced of 
the color. If the light from the anteroom and the kitchen 
shines on the gjass door simultaneously from the outside, 
then gteenish— or rather, n\)t to detract from the defimte- 
ness of the impression— green hght pours down almost the 
length of the panes If the light m the anteroom is turned 
off and only the kitchen light remains, then the pane nearer 
the kitchen becomes deep blue, the other whitish blue, so 
whitish that all the drawings on the frosted glass (stylized 
poppies, tendrils, various rectangles and leaves) dissolve. 

The lights and shadows thrown on the walls and the ceil- 
ing by the electric lights in the street and the bridge down 
below are distorted, partly spoiled, overlapping and hard 
to follow When they installed the electric arc lamps down 
below and when they furnished this room, there was simply 
no housewifely consideration given to how my room 
would look from the sofa at this hour without any light^of 
its own. 

The glare thrown on the ceiling by the trolley passing 
down below moves whitely, wraithlike and with mecham- 
cal pauses along the one wall and ceiling, broken in the 
comer The globe stands on the linen chest in the first, 
fresh, full reflection of the street lights, a greenishly clean 
light on top, has a highlight on its roundness and gives the 
impression that the glare is really too strong for it, although 
the light passes over its smoothness and goes off leaving it 
ratlifer brownish like a leather apple. The light from the 
anteroom throws a large patch of glare on the wall over the 
bed This patch is bounded by a curved line beginning at 
the head of the bed, gives the illusion that the bed is pressed 
down, widens the dark bedposts, raises the ceiling oVer the 
bed. 



DIARIES I 9 II 79 

October 5. Restlessness again for the first time in’several 
days, even pow that I am writing Rage at my sister who 
comes into the room and sits down at the table with a book. 
Waiting for the next trifling occasion to let this rage ex- 
plode. Finally she takes a visitiag card from the tray and 
fiddles around with it between her teeth. With departing 
rage, of which only a stinging vapor remains behind in my 
head, and dawning rehef and confidence, I begin to work. 

I • 

Last night Cafe Savoy. Yiddish troupe.^^ Mrs. K., “male 
impersonator.” In a caftan, short black trousers, white 
stockings, from the black vest a thm white woolen shirt 
emerges that is held in front at the throat by a knot and 
then flares into a wide, loose, long, spreading collar. On her 
head, confining her woman’s hair but necessary anyhow 
and worn by her husband as well, a dark, brimless skull 
cap, over it a large, soft black hat with a turned-up brim. 

I really don’t know what sort of person it is that she and 
her husbahd represent. If I wanted to explain them to some- 
one to whqrn I didn’t want to confess my ignorance, I 
should find that I consider them sextons, employees of the 
'"’temple, notorious lazybones with whom the community 
has come to terms, privileged shnorrers for some religious 
reasoh, people who, precisely as a result of their being set 
apart, are very close to the center of the community’s life, 
know many songs as a result of their useless wandering 
about and spying, see clearly to the core the relationship of 
all the members of the community, but as a result of their 
lack of relatedness to the workaday world don’t know 
what to .do with this knowledge, people who are Jews in 
an especially pure form because they live only m the reli- 
gion, but live in it without effort, understanding or distress. 
They seem to make a fool of everyone, laugh immediately 



8o 


FRANZ KAFKA 


after the murder of a noble Jew, sell themselves to an apos- 
tate, dance with their hands on their earlocks m dehght 
when the unmasked murderer poisons himself and calls 
upon God, and yet all this only because they are as hght as 
a feather, sink to the ground und&? the slightest pressure, 
are sensitive, cry easily with dry faces (they cry themselves 
out in grimaces), but as soon as the pressure is removed 
haven’t the slightest specific gravity but must bounce right 
back up in the air. 

They must have caused a lot of difficulty in a serious 
play, such as Der Meshumed by Lateiner is, for they are 
forever— large as life and often on tiptoe or with both feet 
in the air— at the front of the stage and do not unravel but 
rather cut apart the suspense of the play. The seriousness 
of the play spins itself out, however, in words so compact, 
carefully considered even where possibly improvised, so 
full of the tension of a unified emotion, that even when the 
plot IS going along only at the rear of the stage, it always 
keeps Its meaning. Rather, the two in caftans are suppressed 
now and then, which befits their nature, and jdespite their 
extended arms and snapping fingers one sees behind them 
only the murderer, who, the poison in him, his hand at his 
really too large collar, is staggering to the door. 

The melodies are long, one’s body is glad to confide it- 
self to them. As a result of their long-drawn-out forward 
movement, the melodies are best expressed by a swaying of 
the hips, by raising and lowering extended arms in a calm 
rhythm, by bringing the palms close to the temples and 
taking care not to touch them. Suggests the slapdk}^ 

Some songs, the expression “yiddische kinderlarh,” some 
of this woman’s acting (who, on the stage, because she is a 
Jew, draws us listeners to her because we are Jews, without 
any longing for or curiosity about Christians) made my 



8i 


DIARIES I 9 I I 

cheeks txemble. The representative of the government, 
with the ei^ception of a waiter and two maids standing to 
the left of the stage, perhaps the only Christian in the hall, 
IS a wretched person, afflicted with a facial tic that— espe- 
cially on the left sidewf his face, but spreading also far 
onto the right— contracts and passes from his face with the 
almost merciful quickness, I mean the haste but also the 
regularity, of a second hand. When it reaches the left eye it 
almost obliterates it. For'this contraction new, small, fresh 
muscles have developed m the otherwise quite wasted face. 

The talmudic melody of minute questions, adjurations 
or explanations The air moves mto a pipe and takes the 
pipe along, and a great screw, proud in its entirety, humble 
in Its turns, twists from small, distant beginmngs m the di- 
rection of the one who is questioned. 

October 6 The nvo old men up front at the long table 
near the stage One leans both his arms on the table and 
has only 'his face (whose false, bloated redness with an 
irregular, square, matted beard beneath it sadly conceals 
his old ag£) turned up to the right toward the stage, while 
the other, directly opposite the stage, holds his face, which 
old age has made quite dry, back away from the table on 
which he leans only with his left arm, holding his right arm 
bent in the air in order better to enjoy the melody that his 
fingertips follow and to which the short pipe in his right 
hand weakly yields. “Tateleben, come on and sing,” cries 
the woman now to one, now to the other, at the same time 
stooping a little and stretching her arms forward encourag- 
ingly. . 

The melodies are made to catch hold of every person 
who jumps up and they can, without breaking down, en- 
compass all his excitement even if one won’t believe tfa^ 



82 


FRANZ KAFKA 


have inspired it. The two in caftans are particularly in a 
hurry to meet the singing, as though it were stretching 
their body according to its most essential needs, and the 
ckpping of the hands during the singing is an obvious sign 
of the good health of the man m th? actor. The children of 
the landlord, in a corner of the stage, remain children in 
their relationship to Mrs. K and sing along, their mouths, 
between their pursed bps, full of the melody. 

The play. Twenty years ago Seidemann, a rich 
obviously having marshaled all his criminal instincts toward 
that end, had himself baptized, poisoning his wife at the 
same time, since she would not let herself be forced into 
baptism. Since then he has made every effort to forget the 
jargon that unintentionally echoes in his speech, especially 
at first so that the audience can notice it and because the 
approaching events still leave time for it, and continually 
expresses great disgust for everything Jewish. He has 
promised his daughter to the officer, Dragomirow, while 
she, who IS m love with her cousin, young Edelmann, in a 
big scene, drawing herself up in an unusual stony position, 
broken only at the waist, declares to her father that she 
holds fast to Judaism and ends a whole act with contemptu- 
ous laughter for the violence done her (The Christians in 
the play are an honest Polish servant of Seidemann’i who 
later contributes to his unmasking, honest chiefly because 
Seidemann must be ranged round with contrasts, the officer 
with whom the play— aside from portraying his guilt— con- 
cerns Itself little, because as a distinguished Christian he m- 
terests no one, ]ust the same as a presiding judge who ap- 
pears later, and finally a court attendant whose malice does 
not exceed the requirements of his position and the mirth 
of the two in caftans, although Max calls him a pogromist.) 
Dragomirow, however, for some reason or other can marry 



uIARlES 1911 83 

only if his notes, which old Edelmann holds, are taken up, 
but which- the latter, although he is about to leave for 
Palestine and although Seidemann wants to pay them in 
cash, will not hand over. The daughter arts haughtily to- 
ward the enamored officer and boasts of her Judaism al- 
though she has been baptized, the officer does not know 
what to do, and, his arms slack, his hands loosely clasped 
at the ends of them, looks beseechingly at the father. The 
daughter runs away to Edelmann, she wants to be married 
to her beloved, even if for the time being in secret, since 
according to civil law a Jew cannot marry a Christian 
woman and she obviously cannot convert to Judaism with- 
out the consent of her father. The father arrives, sees that 
without some stratagem all is lost, and outwardly gives his 
blessing to this marriage. They all forgive him, yes, begin 
to love him as though they had been in the wrong, even 
old Edelmann, and especially he, although he knows that 
S€idemann had poisoned his sister (These inconsistencies 
arose perhaps through cutting, but perhaps also because 
the play is -passed on orally most of the time, from one 
, troupe of actors to another ) Through his reconciliation 
Seidemann gets hold, first of all, of Dragomirow’s notes— 
“You know,” he says, “I don’t want this Dragomirow to 
speak badly of the Jews”— and Edelmann gives them to him 
for nothing, then Seidemann calls him to the porfiere in the 
background, ostensibly to show him something, and from 
behind gives him a fatal thrust with a knife through his 
dressing gown into his back. (Between the reconciliation 
and the murder Seidemann was removed from the stage for 
a time to think out the plan and buy the knife.) In this way 
he intends to bring young Edelmann to the gallows, for it 
is he Vhom suspicion must fall upon, and his daughter 
will become free for Dragomirow. He runs away, Edel- 



FRANZ KAFKA 


84 

mann lies behind the poruere. The daughter, wearing her 
bridal veil, enters on the arm of young Edelmaiin, who has 
put on his prayer shawl. The father, they see, unfortunately 
is not yet there.' Seidemann enters and seems happy at the 
sight of the bridal couple. ” ' 

October 8. Then a man appears, perhaps Dragomirow 
himself, perhaps only an actor, but actually a detective 
unknown to us, and explains that he has to search the house 
since “your life isn’t safe in this house.” Seidemann: “Chil- 
dren, don’t worry, this is of course an obvious mistake. 
Everything will be straightened out.” Edelmann’s body is 
found, young Edelmann torn from his beloved and ar- 
rested. Fora whole act Seidemann, with great patience and 
very well-stressed little asides (Yes, yes, very good. No, 
that’s wrong. Yes, now that’s better. Of course, of course), 
instructs the two in caftans how they are to testify in court 
concerning the alleged enmity that has existed between old 
and young Edelmann for years. They get going with diffi- 
culty, there are many misunderstandings (they come for- 
ward at an improvised rehearsal of the court scene and 
declare that Seidemann had commissioned them’ to repre- 
sent the affair in the following way), until finally they 
immerse themselves in that enmity so thoroughly that even 
Seidemann can no longer restrain them— they now know 
how the murder itself took place and the man stabs the 
woman to death with a French bread. This of course is 
again more than will be required of them But Seidemann is 
satisfied enough with the two and hopes with their help 
for a favorable outcome to the trial Here, for the spectator 
who is religious, without its having been expressed because 
it is self-evident, God himself reaches into the play in place 
of the author and strikes the villain blind. 

In the last act the presiding judge is again the eternal 




A Manuscript Page of the Ditnies 
(see page ll) 




* DIARIES I 9 I I 85 

> 

Dragomurow actor (in this, too, contempt is reveiled for 
the Christian, one Jewish actor can play three Christian 
roles well, and if he plays them badly, it doesn’t matter 
either) and beside him, as defense attorney, with great dis- 
play of hair and mustat^he, recognized at once, Seidemann’s 
daughter. Of course, you recognize her easily, but in view^ 
of Dragomirow you assume for a long time that she is play- 
mg a second part until, toward the middle of the act, you 
realize that she has disgaised herself to save her beloved. 
The two in caftans are each supposed to testify individ- 
ually, but that IS very difficult for them as they have re- 
hearsed it together Also, they don’t understand the judge’s 
High German, although it is true that the defense attorney 
helps him out when he gets too involved, as he has to 
prompt him in other respects as well. Then comes Seide- 
mann, who had already tried to direct the two in caftans 
by tugging at their clothes, and by his fluent, decisive 
speech, by his reasonable bearing, by correctly addressing 
the presfding judge in contrast to the former wimesses, 
makes a go,od impression which is in terrible contrast to 
what we know of him His testimony is pretty much with- 
out content, unfortunately he knows very little about the 
whole case. But the last witness, the servant, is, though not 
entiitly aware of it, Seidemann’s real accuser He had 
seen Seidemann buy the knife, he knows that at the crucial 
time Seidemann was at Edelmann’s, he knows, finally, that 
Seidemann hates the Jews and especially Edelmann and 
wanted his notes. The two m caftans )ump up and are 
happy to be able to confirm all this Seidemann defends 
himself ^s a somewhat confused man of honor. Then the 
discussion turns to His daughter. Where is she’ At home, 
naturally, and she’ll bear him out. No, that she won’t do, 
insists the defense attorney, and he will prove it, turns to 



86 


FRANZ KAFKA 


the wall, takes off the wig and turns toward the horrified 
Seidemann in the person of his daughter. The clean white- 
ness of her upper lip looks threatening when she takes off 
the mustache. Seidemann has taken poison in order to es- 
cape the justice of this world, confssses his misdeeds, but 
hardly any longer to the people, rather to the Jewish God 
whom he now professes. Meanwhile the piano player has 
struck up a tune, the two in caftans feel moved by it and 
must start dancing. In the background stands the reunited 
bridal pair, they sing the melody, especially the serious 
bridegroom, in the customary old way. 

First appearance of the two m caftans. They enter Seide- 
mann’s empty room with collection boxes for the temple, 
look around, feel ill at ease, look at each other. Feel along 
the doorposts with their hand, don’t find a mezuzahP 
None on the other doors, either. They don’t want to be- 
lieve it and jump up beside doors as if they were catching 
flies, jumping up and falling back, slapping the very tops 
of the doorposts again and again. Unfortunately all in vain. 
Up to now they haven’t spoken a word. 

Resemblance between Mrs. K and last year’s Mrs. W. 
Mrs. K has a personality perhaps a trifle weaker and'iTiore 
monotonous, to make up for it she is prettier and more re- 
spectable. Mrs. W.’s standing joke was to bump her fellow 
players with her large behmd. Besides, she had a worse 
singer with her and was quite new to us. 

“Male impersonator” is really a false title By virtue of 
the fact that she is stuck into a caftan, her body is entirely 
forgotten. She only reminds one of her body by shrugging 
her shoulder and twisting her back as though she were be- 



« DIARIES I 9 I I 87 

ing bitten by fleas. The sleeves, though sliutt, have to be 
pulled up a little every minute, this the spectator enjoys 
and even watches for it to happen, anticipating the great 
rehef it will be for this woman who has so much to sing and 
to explain in the talmu^ic manner. 

Would like to see a large Yiddish theater as the produc- 
tion may after all suffer because of the small cast and’ 
madequate rehearsal. Also, would hke to know Yiddish ht- 
erature, which is obviously characterized by an uninter- 
rupted tradition of national struggle that determines every 
work. A tradition, therefore, that pervades no other htera- 
ture, not even that of the most oppressed people. It may be 
that other peoples in times of war make a success out of a 
pugnaaous national literature, and that other works, stand- 
ing at a greater remove, acquire from the enthusiasm of 
the audience a national character too, as is the case with 
The Bartered Bride, but here there appear to be only works 
of the first type, and indeed always. 

• 

The appearance of the simple stage that awaits the actors 
.as silently as we Since, ivith its three walls, the chaur and 
the table, it will have to suffice for all the scenes, we expect 
nothing from it, rather with all our energy await the actors 
and are therefore unresistingly attracted by the singing 
from behind the blank walls that introduces the perform- 
ance. 

October 9. If I reach my fortieth year, then I’ll probably 
marry an old maid with protruding upper teeth left a little 
exposed by the upper hp. The upper front teeth of Miss K., 
who was in Pans and London, slant toward each other a 
little like legs which are quickly crossed at the knees. I’ll 
hardly reach my fortieth birthday, however; the frequent 



88 


FRANZ KAFKA 


) 

tension over the left half of my skull, for example, speaks 
against it— it feels hke an inner leprosy which, when I only 
observe it and disregard its unpleasantness makes the same 
impression on me as the skull cross-sections in textbooks, or 
as an almost painless dissection of the living body where 
the knife— a little coolingly, carefully, often stopping and 
going back, sometimes lying still— splits still thinner the 
paper-thin integument close to the functioning parts of the 
bram. 

Last night’s dream which in the morning I myself didn’t 
even consider beautiful except for a small comic scene con- 
sisting of two counterremarks which resulted in that tre- 
mendous dream satisfaction but which I have forgotten. 
''1 walked— whether Max was there right at the start I 
don’t know— through a long row of houses at the level of 
the first or second floor, just as one walks through a tunnel 
from one carriage to another. I walked very quickly, per- 
haps also because the house was so rickety that for that 
reason alone one hurried. The doors between the houses 
I did not notice at all, it was just a gigantic row of rooms, 
and yet not only the differences between the individual 
apartments but also between the houses were recognizable. 
They were perhaps all rooms with beds through which I 
went. One typical bed has remained in my memory. It 
stood at the side to the left of me against the dark or dirty 
wall, which sloped like an attic’s, perhaps had a low pile of 
bedclothes, and its cover, really only a coarse sheet crum- 
pled by the feet of the person who had slept here, hung 
down in a point. I felt abashed to walk through people’s 
rooms at a time when many of them were still lying in 
their beds, therefore took long strides on tiptoes, by which 
I somehow or other hoped to show that I was passing 



' DIARIES I 9 I I 89 

t 

through only by compulsion, was as considerate of every- 
thing as was at all possible, walked softly, and fhat my 
passing through did not, as it were, count at all Therefore, 
too, I never turned my head m any one room and saw only 
either what lay on the r^ght toward the street or on the left 
toward the back wall. 

The row of houses was often mterrupted by brothels; 
and although I u as making this journey seemingly because 
of, them, I walked through them especially quickly so that 
I remember nothing except that they were there However, 
the last room of all the houses was again a brothel, and here 
I remained. The \\ all across from the door through which 
I entered, therefore the last wall of the row of houses, was 
either of glass or merely broken through, and if I had 
walked on I should have fallen It is even more probable 
that It was broken through, for the whores lay toward the 
edge of the floor Two I saw clearly on the ground, the 
hej;d of one hung down a little over the edge into the open 
air. To the left was a solid wall, on the other hand the 
wall on the rmht w as not finished, you could see down into 
the court, .even if not to the bottom of it, and a ramshackle 
gray staircase led dowm in several flights To judge by the 
light in the room the ceiling was like that in the other 
rooma 

I occupied mvself chiefly with the whore whose head 
was hanging down. Max with the one lying beside her on 
the left. I fingered her legs and then for a long time pressed 
the upper parts of her thighs in regular rhythm. My pleas- 
ure in this Was so great that I wondered that for this enter- 
tainmentj which w'as after all really the most beautiful 
kind, one still had to pay nothing. I was convinced that I 
(and I jilone) deceived the world. Then the whore, without 
moving her legs, raised the upper part of her body and 



FRANZ KAFKA 


90 

turned her back to me, which to my horror was covered 
with large seahng-wax-red circles with pahng edges, and 
red splashes scattered among them. I now noticed that her 
whole body was full of them, that I was pressing my thumb 
to her thighs in just such spots and that there were these 
little red particles— as though from a crumbled seal— on my 
fingers too. 

I stepped back among a number of men who seemed to 
be waiting against the wall near the opening of the stair- 
way, on which there was a small amount of traffic. They 
were waiting in the way men m the country stand together 
in the market place on Sunday morning. Therefore it was 
Sunday too. It was here that the comic scene took place, 
when a man I and Max had reason to be afraid of went 
away, then came up the stairs, then stepped up to me, and 
while I and Max anxiously expected some terrible threat 
from him, put a ridiculously simple-minded question to me. 
Then I stood there and with apprehension watched Mgx, 
who, without fear in this place, was sitting on the ground 
somewhere to the left eating a thick potato soup out of 
which the potatoes peeped hke large balls, especially one 
He pushed them down mto the soup with his spoon, per- 
haps with two spoons, or just turned them. 

October 10. Wrote a sophistic article for the Tetschen- 
Bodenbacher Zeitung for and agamst my insurance insti- 
tute. 

Yesterday evening on the Graben. Three actresses com- 
ing toward me from a rehearsal. It is so difficult quickly to 
become familiar with the beauty of three women when in 
addition you also want to look at two actors who ^re ap- 
proaching behind them with that too-swinging actors’ 



DIARIES I 9 I I 91 

walk. The two— of whom the one on the left, with his fat, 
youthful face and open overcoat wrapped around his 
strong body, is representative enough of both— overtake 
the ladies, the one on the left on the sidewalk, the one oh 
the right down in the roadway .’The one on the left grasps 
his hat high up near the top, seizes it with all five fingers,* 
raises it high and calls (the one on the right recollects him- 
self only now) Goodbye! Good mght! But while this 
overtaking and greeting has separated the gentlemen, the 
ladies addressed, as though led by the one nearest the road- 
way who seems to be the weakest and tallest but also the 
youngest and most beautiful, continue on their way quite 
undisturbed, widi an easy greeting which scarcely mter- 
rupts their harmonious conversation. The whole thing 
seemed to me at the moment to be strong proof that theat- 
rical affairs here are orderly and well conducted. 

T)ay before yesterday among the Jews in Cafe Savoy. 
Die Sedemaebt by Feimann. At times (at the moment the 
consciousness of this pierced me) we did not interfere in 
the plot only because we were too moved, not because we 
were mere spectators 

October 12. Yesterday at Max’s wrote in the Paris diary 
In the half-darkness of Rittergasse, in her faU outfit, fat, 
warm R. whom we have known only in her summer blouse 
and thin, blue summer jacket, in which a girl with a not 
entirely faultless appearance is, after all, worse than naked. 
Then you really were able to see the large nose in her 
bloodless face and the cheeks to which you could have 
pressed your hands for a long time before any redness ap- 
peared, the heavy blond down which heaped itself up on 
the cheek and upper lip, the railroad dust which had strayed 



FRANZ KAFKA 


92 

between the nose and cheek, and the sickly whiteness where 
her blouse was cut away. Today, however, we ran after 
her respectfully, and when I had to make my farewells at 
3 ie entrance to a house that went through to Ferdinand- 
strasse' (I was unshaven arid otherwise shabby in appear- 
ance), I afterward felt a few slight impulses of affection 
for her. And when I considered why, I had to keep telling 
myself because she was so warmly dressed. 

October 13. Inaesthetic transition from the taut skin of 
my boss’s bald spot to the delicate wrinkles of his forehead. 
An obvious, very easily imitated fault of nature, bank notes 
should not be made so. 

I didn’t consider the description of R. good, but never- 
theless It must have been better than I thought, or my im- 
pression of R the day before yesterday must have been so 
incomplete that the description was adequate to it or e\en 
surpassed it For when I went home last night the descrip- 
tion came to my mind for a moment, imperceptibly re- 
placed the original impression and I felt that I had seen R. 
only yesterday, and indeed without Max, so that I prepared 
myself to tell him about her just as I have described her here 
for myself 

Yesterday evening on Schutzen Island, did not find my 
colleagues and left immediately. I made some stir in my 
short jacket with my crushed soft hat in my hand, because 
it was cold out, but too hot inside from the breath of the 
beer drinkers, smokers and the wind instrument players of 
the military band. This band was not very high up, could 
not be, either, because the hall is pretty low, and filled the 
one end of the hall to the side,walls. The mass of musicians 



DIARIES I9II ^ 93 

was crowded into this end of the room as though cut to size. 
This crowded impression was then lost a little in the hall, 
as the places near the band were pretty empty and the hall 
filled up only toward the middle. 

Talkativeness of Dr. K. Walked around with him for. 
two hours behind the Franz-Josef railroad station, begged 
him from time to time to let me leave, had clasped my 
hands in impatience and hstened as little as possible. It 
seemed to me that a person who is good at his job, when he 
has got himself involved in talking shop, must become ir- 
responsible; he becomes conscious of his proficiency, there 
are associations with every story, and indeed several, he 
surveys them all because he has experienced them, must in 
haste and out of consideration for me suppress many, some 
I also destroy by asking questions but remind him by these 
of others, show him thereby that he is also in control deep 
into my own thmkmg, b himself plays in most of the 
stories a handsome role which he just touches upon, because 
of which thq suppressed seems even more significant to him, 
now he is however so certain of my admiration that he can 
also complain, for even in his misfortune, his trouble, his 
doubt, he is admirable, his opponents are also capable peo- 
ple arfd worth talking about, in an attorney’s office which 
had four clerks and two chiefs there was a controversy in 
which he alone opposed this office, for weeks the daily 
subject of discussion of the six lawyers. Their best speaker, 
a sharp lawyer, opposed him— to this is attached the Su- 
preme Court whose decisions are allegedly bad, contradic- 
tory; in a tone of farewell I say a word of defense for this 
court, now he produces proofs that the court cannot be 
defended, and once more we must walk up and down the 
street, I am immediately surprised at the badness of this 



FRAXZ KAFKA 


94 

court, whereupon he explains to me why it must be so, the 
court is overburdened, why and how, well, I, must leave, 
but now the Court of Appeals is better and the Court of 
Administration much better still, and why and how, finally 
I can’t be detained any lodger, whereupon he brings in my 
own affairs (setting up the factory), which is what I had 
come to him about and which we had already fully dis- 
cussed, he unconsciously hopes in this way to map me and 
to be able to tempt me back to his stories again. I say some- 
thing, but while speaking I hold out my hand in farewell 
and so escape. 

He is a very good storyteller, by the way, in his stones 
the detailed expansiveness of the brief is mixed with the 
vivacious speech that one often finds in such fat, black 
Jews, healthy for the present, of medium height, excited 
by continuous smoking of cigarettes Legal expressions 
give the speech steadiness, paragraphs are numbered to a 
high count that seems to banish them into a distance Each 
story is developed from its very beginning, speech and 
counterspeech are produced and, as it were, shuffled up by 
personal asides, matters that are beside the point, that no 
one would think of, are first mentioned, then called beside 
the point and set aside (“A man, his name is beside the 
point”), the listener is personally drawn in, quesiioned, 
while alongside the plot of the story thickens, sometimes, 
preliminary to a story which cannot interest him at all, the 
listener is even questioned, uselessly of course, in order to 
establish some sort of provisional connection, the listener’s 
interjected remarks are not immediately introduced, which 
would be annoying (Kubin), but are shortly put in the 
right place as the story goes on, so that the listener is flat- 
tered and drawn into the story and given a special right to 
be a listener. 



DIARIES 1911 ^ 95 

October 14. Yesterday evening at the Savoy. Sulcamth by 
A. Goldfaden. Really an opera, but every sung play is 
called an operetta, even this trifle seems to me to point to an 
artistic endeavor that is stubborn, hasty and passionate for 
the wrong reasons, thaS^cuts across European art in a direc- 
tion that IS partly arbitrary. 

The story A hero saves a girl who is lost in the desert 
(“I pray thee, great, almighty God”) and because of the 
torments of thirst has thrown herself into a well. They 
swear to be true to each other (“My dear one, my loved 
one, my diamond found in the desert”) by calling upon the 
well and a red-eyed desert cat in witness. The girl, Sulamith 
(Mrs. Ts.), is taken back to Bethlehem to her father, 
Manoach (Ts.), by Cingitang, the savage servant of Ab- 
salom (P.), while Absalom (K.) goes on another journey 
to Jerusalem; there, however, he falls in love with Abigail, 
a nch girl of Jerusalem (Mrs. K.), forgets Sulamith and 
marries Sulamith waits for her lover at home in Bethlehem. 
“Many people go to Ye^usholaim and arrive beshultm” 
“He, the nqble one, will be untrue to me' ” By means of 
despairing outbursts she gams a confidence prepared for 
anything and determines to feign insanity m order not to 
have to marry and to be able to wait. “My will is of iron, 
my hrfart I make a fortress ” And even in the insanity which 
she now feigns for years she enjoys sadly and aloud all her 
memories of her lover, for her insanity is concerned only 
with the desert, the well and the cat. By means of her in- 
sanity she immediately repels her three suitors with whom 
Manoach was able to get along in peace only by organizing 
a lottery; Joel Gedoni (U.), “I am the most powerful Jew- 
ish hero,” Avidanov, the landowner (R.P.), and the pot- 
bellied priest, Nathan (Lotvy), who feels superior to every- 
one, “Give her to me, I die for her.” Absalom suffered a 



FRANZ KAFKA 


96 

misfortune, one of his children was bitten to death by a 
desert cat, the other falls into a well. He remembers his 
guilt, confesses all to Abigail “Restrain your crying.” 
“Cease with your words to spht my heart.” “Alas, it is all 
ernes that I speak.” Some ideas seer/i on the point of taking 
shape around the two and then disappear. Is Absalom to 
return to Sulamith and desert AbigaiP Sulamith too de- 
serves rachmones. Finally Abigail releases him. In Bethle- 
hem Manoach laments over his daughter: “Alas, oh, the 
years of my old age.” Absalom cures her with his voice. 
“The rest. Father, I will tell thee later ” Abigail collapses 
there in the Jerusalem vineyard, Absalom has as justifica- 
tion only his heroism. 

At the end of the performance we still expect the actor 
Lowy, whom I would admire in the dust He is supposed, 
as is customar)', “to announce” “Dear guests, I thank you 
in all our names for your visit and cordially invite you to 
tomorrow’s performance, when the world-famous master- 
piece by will be produced. Until we meet 

again' ” Exit with a flourish of his hat InsteaiJ, we see the 
curtain first held tightly closed, then tentatively drawn 
apart a little. This goes on quite awhile. Finally it is drawn 
wide open, in the middle a button holds it together, behind 
it we see Lowy walking toward the footlights and, his face 
turned to us, the audience, defending himself with his 
hands against someone who is attacking him from behind, 
until suddenly the whole curtain with its wire supports on 
top is pulled down by Lowy who is looking for something 
to hold on to Before our eyes P., who had played the savage 
and who is still bowed down as if the curtain were drawn, 
grabs Lowy (who is on his knees) by his head and pushes 
him sideways off the stage. Everyone runs together into 
the wing of the theater. “Close the curtain!” they shout on- 



DIARIES I 9 I I 97 

the almost completely exposed stage on which IVlrs. Ts., 
with her pgle Sulamith face, is standing pitiably. Little 
waiters on tables and chairs put the curtain somewhat m 
order, the landlord tries to calm the government repre- 
sentative who, howeveb, wants only to get away and is be- 
mg held back by this attempt to calm him, behind the, 
curtain one hears Airs. Ts.: “And u'e who claim to preach 
morals to the public from the stage. . . The association 
of. Jewish office workers, Zukunft, which took over the 
next night under its own direction and before tonight’s 
performance had held a regular membership meeting, de- 
cides because of this occurrence to call a special meeting 
within half an hour, a Czech member of the association 
prophesies complete ruin for the actors as a result of their 
scandalous behavior. Then suddenly one sees Lowy, who 
seemed to have disappeared, pushed toward a door by the 
headwaiter, R , with his hands, perhaps also with his knees. 
He is simply being thrown out. This headwaiter, who be- 
fore and later stands before every guest, before us as well, 
like a dog, jvith a doglike muzzle which sags over a large 
mouth closed by humble wrmkles on the side, has his — 

October i6 Strenuous Sunday yesterday. The whole 
staff ^ave Father notice. By soft words, cordiality, elFective 
use of his illness, his size and former strength, his experi- 
ence, his cleverness, he wins almost all of them back in 
group and individual discussions. An important clerk, F., 
wants time until Monday to think it over because he has 
given his word to our manager who is stepping out and 
would like to take the whole staff along into his newly-to- 
be established business. On Sunday the bookkeeper writes 
he cannot remain after all, R. will not release him from his 
promise. 



98 


FRANZ KAFKA 


I go to see him m ^izkov. His young wife with round 
cheeks, longish face and a small, thick nose of the sort that 
never spoils Czech faces A too-Iong, very loose, flowered 
and spotted housecoat. It seems especially long and loose 
because she moves especially humedly in order to greet 
. me, to place the album properly on the table in a final 
straightening of the room and to disappear in order to have 
her husband called. The husband enters with similar hur- 
ried movements, perhaps mutated by his very dependent 
wife, the upper part of his body bent foiward and his 
arms swinging rapidly hke pendulums while the lower part 
is noticeably behind it. Impression of a man you have 
known for ten years, seen often, regarded little, with whom 
you suddenly come into a closer relationship. The less 
success I have with my Czech arguments (indeed, he al- 
ready had a signed contract with R , he was just so embar- 
rassed by my father Saturday evening that he had not 
mentioned the contract), the more catlike his face becomes 
Toward the end I act a little with a very pleasurable feel- 
ing, so I look silently around the room with mv face drawn 
rather long and my eyes narrowed, as though I were pur- 
suing something significant mto the ineffable. Am, how- 
ever, not unhappy when I see that it has little effect and that 
I, instead of being spoken to by him m a new tone*, must 
begm afresh to persuade him. TTie conversation was begun 
with the fact that on the other side of the street another T. 
lives, it was concluded at the door with his surprise at my 
thin clothes in the cold weather. Indicative of my first 
hopes and final failure. I made him promise, however, to 
come to see Father in the afternoon. My argijments in 
places too abstract and formal. Mistake not to have called 
his wife into the room. 

Afternoon to Radotin to keep the clerk. Miss, as a re-. 



DIARIES I 9 I I 99 

1 

suit, the meeting with Lowy of whom I think incessantly. 
In the carrijige- pointed nose of the old woman with still 
almost youthful, taut skin. Does youth therefore end at the 
tip of the nose and death begin there? The swallowing of 
the passengers that glidfes downtheir throats, the widening 
of their mouths as a sign that in their judgment the railroad ^ 
journey, the combination of the other passengers, their 
seating arrangements, the temperature in the carriage, even 
the copy of Pam that I hnld on my knees and that several 
glance at from time to time (as it is after all something that 
they would not have expected in the compartment), are 
harmless, natural, unsuspicious, while at the same time they 
still believe that everything could have been much worse. 

Up and down in Air. H.’s yard, a dog puts his paw on the 
tip of my foot which I shake. Children, chickens, here and 
there adults. A children’s nurse, occasionally leaning on the 
railing of the Pawlatsche ^ or hiding behind a door, has her 
eye on me. Under her eyes I do not know just what I am, 
whether indifferent, embarrassed, young or old, impudent 
or devoted„holding my hands behind or before me, animal 
lover or man of affairs, friend of H. or supplicant, superior 
to those gathered at the meeting who sometimes go from 
the tavern to the pissoir and back in an unbroken line, or 
ridiciilous to them because of my thin clothes, Jew or 
Christian, etc. The walking around, wiping my nose, occa- 
sional reading of Pan, timid avoiding of the Pawlatsche 
with my eyes only suddenly to see that it is empty, watch- 
ing the poultry, being greeted by a man, seeing through the 
tavern window* the flat faces of the men set crookedly close 
together and turned toward a speaker, everything con- 
tributes to it Mr. H. leaves the meeting from time to tune 
and I ask him to use his influence for us with the clerk 
whom he had brought into our office. Black-brown beard 



100 


FRANZ KAFKA 


growing around cheeks and chin, black eyes, between eyes 
and beard the dark shadings of his cheeks. He is a friend 
of my father’s, I knew him even as a child and the idea that 
he was a coffee-roaster always made him even darker and 
more manly for me than hewas. 

October 17 . 1 finish nothmg because I have no time and 
it presses so within me. If the whole day were free and 
this morning restlessness could mount within me until mid- 
day and wear itself out by evemng, then I could sleep. This 
way, however, there is left for this restlessness only an 
evening twilight hour at most, it gets somewhat stronger, 
is then suppressed, and uselessly and injuriously undermines 
the night for me. Shall I be able to bear it long? And is 
there any purpose in bearing it, shall I, then, be given time? 

Napoleon is remimscing at the royal table in Erfurt. 
When I was still a mere lieutenant m the Fifth Regiment 
. . • (the royal highnesses look at each other in embarrass- 
ment, Napoleon notices it and corrects himself), when I 
still had the honor to be a mere lieutenant. . . . When I 
think of this anecdote the arteries in my neck swell with 
the pride that I can easily feel with him and that vicariously 
thrills through me. 

Agam in Radotin’ freezing, I then walked around alone 
in the garden, then recognized m an open window the chil- 
dren’s nurse who had walked to this side of the house with 
me. 


October 20. The 1 8th at Max’s, wrote about Paris. Wrote 
badly, without really arriving at that freedom of true de- 
scription which releases one’s foot from the experienced. 



lOI 


> DIARIES I 9 I I 

I was also dull after the great exalution of the previous day 
that had ended with Lowy’s lecture. During the day I was 
not yet in any unusual frame of mind, went with Max to 
meet his mother who was arriving from Gablonz, was in 
the coffeehouse with tiem and^then at Max’s, who .played 
a gypsy dance from La Jobe Fille de Perth for me. A 
dance in which for pages only the hips rock gently in a* 
monotonous ticking and the face has a slow, cordial ex- 
pression. Until finally, toward the end, briefly and late, 
the inner wildness that has been tempted outward arrives, 
shakes the body, overpowers it, compresses the melody so 
that it beats into the heights and depths (unusually bitter, 
dull tones are heard in it) and then comes to an unheeded 
close. At the beginning, and unmistakable through it all, a 
strong feeling of closeness to gypsydom, perhaps because 
a people so wild in the dance shows its tranquil side only to 
a friend. Impression of great truth of die first dance. Then 
l^fed through Aiissprucbe Napoleons. How easily you 
become for the moment a httle part pf your own tremen- 
dous notion of Napoleon' Then, already boiling, I went 
home, I couldn’t withstand one of my ideas, disordered, 
pregnant, disheveled, swollen, amidst my furniture which 
was rolling about me; overwhelmed by my pains and wor- 
ries, taking up as much space as possible, for despite my 
bulk I was very nervous, I entered the lecture hall From 
the way in which I was sitting, for instance, and very truly 
sat, I should as a spectator immediately have recognized my 
condition. 

Lowy read humorous sketches by Sholom Aleichem, 
then a story by Peretz, the Ltchtverkauferin by Rosenfeld, 
a poem by Bialik (the one instance where the poet stooped 
fronj Hebrew to Yiddish, himself translating his original 
Hebrew poem into Yiddish, in order to popularize this 



102 


FRANZ KAFKA 


poem which, by making capital out of the Kishinev 
pogrom, sought to further the Jewish cause) A recurrent 
widening of the eyes, natural to the actor, which are then 
left so for a while, framed by the arched eyebrows. Com- 
plete truth of all the reading, the w^ak raising of the right 
,arm from the shoulder, the adjustmg of the pince-nez that 
seems borrowed for the occasion, so poorly does it fit the 
nose, the position under the table of the leg that is stretched 
out in such a way that the weak joint between the upper 
and lower parts of the leg is particularly m motion, the 
crook of the back, weak and wretched-looking since the 
unbroken surface of a back cannot deceive an observer in 
the way that a face does, with its eyes, the hollows and 
projections of its cheeks, or even with some trifle be it only 
a stubble of beard. After the readmg, while still on my way 
home, I felt all my abilities concentrated, and on that ac- 
count complained to my sisters, even to my mother, at 
home. 

On the 19th at Dr. K.’s about the factory; The little 
theoretical hostility that is bound to arise between con- 
tracting parties when contracts are being made. The way 
my eyes searched H.’s face, which was turned toward the 
lawyers. This hostility is bound to arise all the more be- 
tween two people who otherwise are not accustomed to 
think through their mutual relationship and therefore make 
difficulties about every trifle. Dr. K ’s habit of walking 
diagonally up and down the room with the tense, forward 
rocking of the upper part of his body, as though in a draw- 
ing-room, at the same time telhng stories and frequently, 
at the end of a diagonal, shaking off the ash of his cigarette 
into one of the three ash trays placed about the room. 



' DIARIES I 9 I I 103 

This morning at N. N. Co. The way the boss leans back 
sideways in his armchair in order to get room and support 
for the Eastern Jewish gestures of his hand. The inter- 
action and reciprocal re-enforcement of the play of his 
hands and face. Sometuiies he combmes the two, either by 
lookmg at his hands, or for the convemence of the listener, , 
holdmg them close to his face. Temple melodies m the 
cadence of his speech, the melody is led from finger to 
finger as though through v'arious registers, especially w'hen 
enumerating several points Then met Father at the Graben 
with Mr. Pr., who raises his hand to make his sleeve fall 
back a httle (since he doesn’t himself want to draw back 
the sleeve) and there in the middle of the Graben makes 
powerful screwing motions by opening up his hand and 
lettmg It fall away with the fingers spread. 

I am probably sick, since yesterday my body has been 
itching all over. In the afternoon my face was so hot and 
blotched 'that I was afraid the assistant 'giving me a haircut, 
who could see me and my reflected image all the time, 
would recogmze that I had a serious disease. Also the con- 
nection betiveen stomach and mouth is partly disturbed, a 
lid the size of a gulden moves up or down, or stays down 
below^ from where it exerts an expanding effect of light 
pressure that spreads upward over my chest. 

More on Radotin' Invited her to come down. The first 
answer was serious although until then, together with die 
girl entrusted to her, she had giggled and flirted across at 
me in a 'w^ay she would never have dared from the moment 
we became acquainted. We then laughed a great deal to- 
gethej although I was freezing down below and she up 
.^above at the open window. She pressed her breasts against 



104 FRANZ KAFKA ' 

• f 

her crossed arms and, her knees apparently bent, pressed 
her whole body against the window sill. She was seventeen 
years old and took me to be fifteen or sixteen,-** I couldn’t 
make her change her mind throughout our entire conversa- 
tion. Her small nose was*a httle fcrooked and threw an 
.unusual shadow across her cheek, which, to be sure, 
wouldn’t help me to recognize her again. She was not from 
Radotin but from Chuchle (the next station on the way to 
Prague), which she wouldn’t let me forget. 

Then a walk with the clerk (who even without my trip 
would have remamed with our firm) in the dark out of 
Radotin on the highway and back to the railroad station. 
On one side waste hills used by a cement factory for its 
supply of chalky sand. Old mills Story of a poplar whirled 
out of the earth by a tornado. Face of the clerk doughlike 
reddish flesh on heavy bones, looks tired but robust within 
his limits. Does not show surprise even by his voice that 
we are walking here together. A clear moon over a large 
field, the chimney smoke looking like clouds in the light; 
the field, right in the middle of the town, bought up as a 
precaution by a factory but left unused for the time being, 
surrounded by factory buildmgs which were strongly but 
only partly lit up by electric hghts Train signals Scuffling 
of rats near the path worn across the field by the towns- 
people in defiance of the will of the factory. 

Examples of the way this writing, which is on the whole 
trivial, strengthens me after all; 

Monday, the i6th, I was with Lowy at the National 
Theater to see Dubrovaika Trilogjia Play and production 
were hopeless. Of the first act I remember the beautiful 
chime of a mantel clock, the singing of the “Marseillaise” 
by Frenchmen marching outside the window, the fading 



DIARIES I 9 I I 105 

song IS repeatedly taken up by the newcomers and rises 
agam; a girl, dressed in black carries her shadow through 
the streak of hght that the settmg sun throws on the parquet 
floor. Of the second act only tlie delicate throat of a girl, 
which rises out of shoul’ders dreised in red-brown, expands 
from between puffed sleeves and lengthens mto a smallo 
head. Of the third act the crushed Prince Albert, the dark 
fancy vest of an old, stooped descendant of the former 
gospodars with the gold' watch cham drawn diagonally 
across it. So it is not much. The seats were expensive, I was 
a poor benefactor to have thrown money away here while 
L. was in need, finally he was even somewhat more bored 
than I. In short, I had agam demonstrated the misfortune 
that follows every undertaking that I begin by myself. But 
while I usually unite myself mdivisibly with this misfor- 
tune, attract all earlier cases of misfortune up to me, all 
later ones down to me, I was this time almost completely 
independent, bore everything quite easily as something 
that happens just once, and for the first time in the theater 
even felt my head, as the head of a spectator, raised high 
out of the collective darkness of the seat and the body into 
a distinct light, independent of the bad occasion of this 
play and this production. 

A second example; Yesterday eveiung I simultaneously 
held out both my hands to my two sisters-in-law on Mari- 
engasse with a degree of adroitness as if they were two 
right hands and I a double person 

October 21. A counterexample* When my boss confers 
with me about office matters (today the filing cabinet), I 
cannot look him in the eye for long without there coming 
into my eyes against my will a slight bitterness which 
forces either my look or his away. His look yields more 



I06 FRANZ KAFKA 

briefly but more often to every impulse to look away, since 
he is not aware of the reason, but his glance immediately 
returns as he considers it all only a momentary fatigue of 
his eyes. I defend myself agamst it more vigorously, there- 
fore hasten the zigzagging' of my glance, look by prefer- 
'Cnce along his nose and across to the shadows of his cheeks, 
often only keep my face toward him by the aid of the teeth 
and tongue in my tight-shut mouth— when I must, I lower 
my eyes, to be sure, but never firther than to his tie, but 
get the most direct look immediately after he turns his eyes 
away, when I follow him closely and without considera- 
tion. 

The Jewish actors Mrs. Tschissik has protuberances on 
her cheeks near her mouth. Caused in part by hollow 
cheeks as a result of the pains of hunger, childbed, journeys 
and acting, in part by the relaxed unusual muscles she had 
to develop for the actor’s movements of her large, wbat 
originally must have been a heavy mouth. Most of the time, 
as Sulamith, she wore her hair loose, which covered her 
cheeks so that her face sometimes looked like the face of 
a girl out of the past. She has a large, bony, moderately 
robust body and is tightly laced. Her walk easily takes on 
a solemmty since she has the habit of raising, stretching and 
slowly moving her long arms. Especially when she sang the 
Jewish national anthem, gently rocked her large hips and 
moved her arms, bent pardlel to her hips, up and down with 
hands cupped as though she were playing with a slowly fly- 
ing ball. 

October 22. Yesterday with the Jews. Kol Nidre by 
Scharkansky, pretty bad play with a good, witty Jetter- 
writing scene, a prayer by the lovers standing up beside" 



‘ DIARIES I91I 107 

each other with hands clasped, the converted Grand In- 
quisitor pressing himself against the curtain of the Ark of 
the Covenant, he mounts the stairs and remains standing 
there, his head bowed, his lips against the curtain, holds the 
prayer book before hi:^ chattering teeth. For the first time 
on this fourth evening my distinct mability to get a clear, 
impression. Our large company and the visits at my sisters’ 
table were also responsible for it. Nevertheless, I needn’t 
have been so weak. With my love for Mrs. Ts., who only 
thanks to Max sat beside me, I behaved wretchedly. I’ll 
recover again, however, even now I feel better. 

Mrs. Tschissik (I enjoy writing the name so much) likes 
to bow her head at the table even while eating roast goose, 
you believe you can get in under her eyehds with your 
glance if you first carefully look along her cheeks and 
then, makmg yourself small, slip in, in doing which you 
dqn’t even first have to raise the lids, for they are raised 
and even let a bluish gleam through which lures you on to 
the attempt. Out of her truthful acting flourishes of her 
fist now and then emerge, turns of her arm that drape in- 
visible trains about her body, she places her outspread 
fingers on her breast because the artless shriek does not 
sufiice. Her acting is not varied the frightened look at her 
antagonist, the seeking for a way out on the small stage, the 
soft voice that, without being raised, mounts heroically in 
even, short ascents aided only by a greater inner resonance, 
the joy that spreads through her face across her high fore- 
head into her hair; the self-sufficiency and independence 
of all other means when she sings solos, the holding herself 
erect when she resists that compels the spectator to devote 
his attention to her whole body— but not much more. But 
»there is the truth of the whole and as a result the conviction 



108 FRANZ KAFKA " 

0 ( 

that the least of her effects cannot be taken from her, that 
she is independent of the play and of us. 

The sympathy we have for these actors who are so 
good, -who earn nothing and wiio do not get nearly 
.enough gratitude and fame is really only sympathy for the 
sad fate of many noble strivmgs, above all of our own. 
Therefore, too, it is so immoderately strong, because on 
the surface it is attached to strangers and in reality belongs 
to us. Nevertheless, in spite of everything, it is so closely 
bound up with the actors that I cannot disengage it even 
now. Because I recognize this and in spite of it this sym- 
pathy attaches itself even more closely to them. 

The striking smoothness of Mrs. Tschissik’s cheeks 
alongside her muscular mouth. Her somewhat shapeless 
little girl. 

c 

Walkmg with Lowy and my sister for three hours. 

October 23. The actors by their presence always con- 
vince me to my horror that most of what I’ve written about 
them until now is false It is false because I write about 
them with steadfast love (even now, while I write ifdown, 
this too becomes false) but varying ability and this varying 
ability does not hit off the real actors loudly and correctly 
but loses Itself dully in this love that will never be satisfied 
with the ability and therefore thmks it is protecting the ac- 
tors by preventing this ability from exercising itself. 

Quarrel between Tschissik and Lowy. Ts.: Edelstatt is 
the greatest Jewish writer. He is sublime Rosenfel 4 is of 
course also a great writer, but not the foremost. Lowy: T&. 



DIARIES I 9 I I 109 

IS a socialist and because Edelstatt writes socialist poems, 
because he is editor of a Jewish socialist newspaper in Lon- 
don, therefore Ts considers him the greatest But who is 
Edelstatt, his party knows him, no one else, but the world 
knows Rosenfeld — Ts.:’ It is nop a question of recognition. 
Everything of Edelstatt’s is sublime.— L.: Of course. I’m. 
well acquainted with him too. The Selt^tmorder, for ex- 
ample, IS very good.— Ts.. What’s the use of arguing. We 
won’t agree. I’ll repeat Thy opmion until tomorrow and 
you the same.— L.: I until the day after tomorrow. 

Goldfaden, married, spendthrift, even if terribly badly 
off. About a hundred pieces. Stolen liturgical melodies 
made popular. The whole people sings them. The tailor at 
his work (is imitated), the maid, etc. 

With so little room for dressing you are bound, as Ts. 
says, to get into quarrels. You come off the stage excited, 
everyone considers himself the greatest actor, then if 
someone, foj example, steps on someone else’s foot, which 
cannot be avoided, not only a quarrel but a good battle is 
ready to break out. But in Warsaw there were seventy-five 
small, individual dressing rooms, each one with light. 

J 

At six o’clock I met the actors in their coffeehouse 
seated around two tables, divided into the two hostile 
groups. A book by Peretz was on the table of the Ts. 
group. Lowy had just shut it and stood up to leave with 
me. 


Until the age of twenty Lowy was a bocher who stud- 
ied asd spent the money of his well-to-do father. There 
•was a society of young people of the same age who met in 



no 


FRANZ KAFKA 


a locked tavern precisely on Saturday and, dressed in their 
caftans, smoked and otherwise sinned against the Sabbath 
commandments. 

“The great Adler” from New ‘fork, the most famous 
I Yiddish actor, who is a millionaire, for whom Gordin 
wrote Der Wilde Mensch and whom Lowy in Karlsbad 
had asked not to come to the performance because he 
didn’t have the courage to act’ in his presence on their 
poorly equipped stage.— Real sets, not this miserable stage 
on which you cannot move. How shall we play the wild 
man' You need a sofa for it. In the Crystal Palace m Leip- 
zig It was magnificent. Windows you could open, the sun 
shone in, you needed a throne in the play, good, there was 
a throne, I walked toward it through the crowd and was 
really a king. It is much easier to act there. Here every- 
thmg confuses you. 

October 24. Mother works all day, is merry and sad as 
the fancy strikes her, without taking advantage of her own 
condition in the slightest, her voice is clear, too loud foi 
ordinary speech but does you good when you are sad and 
suddenly hear it after some time For a long time now I 
have been complaining that I am always ill, but nev 3 r have 
any definite illness that would compel me to go to bed. 
This wish certainly goes back chiefly to the fact that I 
know how comforting Mother can be when, for example, 
she comes from the lighted living room into the twilight of 
the sick room, or in the evening, when the day begins to 
change monotonously into night, returns from business 
and with her concerns and hurried instructions once more 
causes the day, already so late, to begin again and ’•ouses 
the invalid to help her in this. I should wish that for myself 



* DIARIES 1 9 I I III 

I } 

once more, because then I should be weak, therefore con- 
vinced by eyerythmg my mother did, and could enjoy 
childish pleasure with age’s keener capacity for gratifica- 
tion. Yesterday it occurred to me that I did not always 
love jny mother as she ’deserved and as I could, only be- 
cause the German language prevented it. The Jewish, 
mother is no “Mutter,” to' call her “Mutter” makes her a 
htde comic (not to herself, because we are m Germany), 
we give a Jewish woman the name of a German mother, 
but forget the contradiction that sinks into the emotions 
so much the more heavily, “Mutter” is peculiarly German 
for the Jew, it unconsciously contains, together with the 
Christian splendor Christian coldness also, the Jewish 
woman who is called “Mutter” therefore becomes not 
only comic but strange. Mama would be a better name if 
only one didn’t imagine “Mutter” behmd it. I beheve that 
it is only the memories of the ghetto that still preserve the 
Jewish family, for the word “Vater” too is far from mean- 
ing the Jewish father. * 

J 

Today I stood before Counselor L., who asked about 
my illness unexpectedly, umnvited, childishly, lyingly, ri- 
diculously and to the point where I lost patience. We 
hadn’t ’spoken so intimately for a long time, or perhaps 
never at all— I felt my face, which had never before been 
so closely observed by him, reveal parts to him in spurious 
frankness that he hardly understood but that nevertheless 
surprised him. I was unrecognizable to myself. T know 
him quite well. 

October 26. Thursday. All afternoon yesterday Lowy 
read fjom Gott, Mensch, Teufel by Gordin and then from 
Iris own Paris diaries. The day before yesterday I saw the 



II2 


FRANZ KAFKA 


performance of Der Wtlde Mensch by Gordin. Gordin is 
better than Lateiner, Scharkansky, Feunann, etc., because 
he has more detail, more order and more logical sequence 
in this order, he therefore somehow lacks the immediate 
Jewishness that is always'bemg improvised m other plays, 
the clamor of this Jewishne® rmgs more dully and there- 
fore in less detail. Of course, concessions are made to the 
audience and sometimes you beheve you must stretch in 
order to see the play over the heads of the Jewish theater 
audience of New York (the character of the wild man, the 
whole story of Mrs. Selde), but worse is the fact that pal- 
pable concessions are made also to some vaguely felt art; 
for example, m Der Wilde Mensch the plot rambles as a 
result of hesitancy, the wild man dehvers speeches hu- 
manly unintelhgible but dramatically so clumsy that one 
would prefer to close one’s eyes, the same is true of the 
older girl in Gott, Mensch^ Teufel. Parts of the plot of Der 
Wtlde Mensch are very spirited. A young widow marries 
an old man with fdur children and immediately brings her 
lover, Vladimir Vorobeitchik, along into the marriage. 
The two proceed to ruin the whole family, Shmul Leibhch 
(Pipes) must hand over all his money and becomes sick, 
the oldest son, Simon (Klug), a student, leaves the house, 
Alexander becomes a gambler and drunkard, Lise ( Fschis- 
sik) becomes a prostitute and Lemech (Lowy), the idiot, 
is driven to idiotic insanity by hate of Mrs. Selde, because 
she takes the place of his mother, and by love, because she 
is the first young woman to whom he feels close. At this 
point the plot reaches a climax with the murder of Selde by 
Lemech. All the others remain mcomplete and -helpless in 
the spectator’s memory. The conception of this woman 
and her lover, a conception that asks no one’s opinion, gave 
me a vague, different self-confidence. 



' DIAltlES I 9 I I II 3 

^ t » 

The discreet impression made by the playbill. One 
learns not only the names but a little more, yet only so 
much as the audience has to know, even a very cool audi- 
ence with the best mtentions, about a family exposed to 
their judgment Shmul Leiblich is a “rich merchant,”' how- 
ever, it is not said that he is old and infirm, that he is a ri-, 
diculous ladies’ man, a bad father and an irreverent wid- 
ower who remarries on the anmversary of his wife’s death. 
And yet all these characterizations would be more accu- 
rate than that on the playbill, for at the end of the play he is 
no longer rich, because the Selde woman has thoroughly 
robbed him, he is also hardly a merchant any longer, since 
he has neglected his business. Simon is “a student” on the 
playbill, therefore something very vague, something we 
know many sons of our most distant acquaintances are. 
Alexander, this characterless young man, is just “Alex- 
ander,” of Lise, the home-loving girl, we know also onfy 
that she is “Lise.” Lemech is unfortunately “an idiot,” for 
that is something that cannot be hushed up. Vladimir Vor- 
obeitchik is^only “Selde’s lover,” but not the corrupter of 
a family, not a drunkard, gambler, wastrel, idler, parasite. 
In the characterization, “Selde’s lover,” much of course is 
betrayed, but considering his behavior it is the least that 
can be? said. In addition to this the scene of action is Russia, 
the scarcely assembled characters are scattered over a tre- 
mendous area, or assembled in a small, unrevealed place in 
this area, in short, the play has become impossible, the 
spectator will get to see nothing. 

—Nevertheless, the play begins, the obviously great 
powers of the author begin to work, things come to h’ght 
which one would not expect of the characters on the play- 
bill Jyit which fall to their lot with the greatest inevitability 
if one can only persuade oneself to believe in all the whip- 



o 


II4 FRANZ KAFKA 

• o 

ping, snatching away, beating, slapping on the shoulder, 
f aintin g, throat-cutting, hmping, dancing in Russian top 
boots, dancing with raised skirts, rolling on the sofa, which 
are after all things that it does no good to contradict. 
Yet not even the climax of the sp&tator’s excitement, re- 
,membered afterward, is necessary in order to recognize 
that the discreet impression made by the playbill is a false 
impression which can be formed only after the perform- 
ance, and then is already maccurate, yes, impossible, an 
impression which can originate only in some tired outsider, 
since for one who judges honestly no decent relationship 
can be seen between the playbill and the play after its per- 
formance. 

From the dash on, written in despair, because today they 
are playing cards with unusual uproar, I must sit at the 
common table, O. laughs with all her mouth, gets up, sits 
down, reaches across the table, speaks to me, and I, to com- 
plete the misfortune, write so badly and must thmk iif 
Lowy’s Pans recollections, well-written with an uninter- 
rupted feeling, which come out of an independent fire 
while I, at least now (mostly, I am certain, because I have 
so little time), am almost entirely under Max’s influence, 
which sometimes, to cap it all, even spoils my enjoyment 
of his work as well. Because it consoles me I write d6wn an 
autobiographical remark of Shaw’s, although it actually is 
the opposite of consoling: As a boy he was apprentice in 
the office of a real-estate agency in Dublin. He soon gave 
up this position, went to London and became a writer. In 
the first nine years, from 1876 to 1885, he earned 140 
kronen in all. “But although I was a strong young man and 
my family found itself in poor circumstances, I did not 
throw myself into the struggle for a livehhood; I tljrew 
my mother in and let her support me. I was no support for 



' DIARIES I9I I II5 

f } 

my old father, on the contrary, I hung on to his coattails,” 
In the end this is little consolation for me. The free years 
he spent in London are already past for me, the possible 
happiness becomes ever more impossible, I lead a horrible 
synthetic life and am cowardly and miserable enoilgh to 
follow Shaw only to the extent of having read the passage^ 
to my parents. How this possible hfe flashes before my 
eyes m colors of steel, with spanmng rods of steel and airy 
darkness between! 

October 27. Ldwy’s stories and diaries: How Notre 
Dame frightens him, how the tiger m the Jardin des Plantes 
affects him as an image of one who despairs and hopes, ap- 
peasing his despair and hope with food, how his pious 
father in misapprehension questions him as to whether he 
can now go for walks on Saturday, whether he now has 
time to read modern books, whether he now may eat on 
the fast days, while as a matter of fact he must work on 
Saturdays, has no time for anything &nd fasts more than 
any rehgion prescribed. When he walks through the 
streets chewing his black beard it looks from a distance as 
though he were eating chocolate. The work in the cap fac- 
tory and his friend the socialist who considers everyone a 
bourgeois who does not work exactly the way he does— 
such as Lowy with his fine hands— who is bored on Sun- 
days, who despises reading as something luxurious, cannot 
read himself and ironically asks Lowy to read him a letter 
that he had received. 

The Jewish ritual bath that every Jewish community in 
Russia has, which I picture to myself as a cabin with a basin 
of fxactly determined outline, with arrangements ap- 
jpointed and supervised by the rabbi, which must only 



FRANZ KAFKA 


ii6 

wash the earthly dirt from the soul, whose external con- 
dition IS therefore a matter of indifference, that is, a sym- 
bol, therefore can be, and is, filthy and stmkmg, but still 
fulfils its purpose. The woman comes here to purify her- 
self of her period, the Torah scribe to purify himself of all 
•sinful thoughts before writmg the last verse of a book of 
the Torah. 

Custom, immediately after awakemng, to dip the fingers 
three times m water, as the evil spirits have settled during 
the night on the second and third jomts of the fingers. 
Rationalist explanation: To prevent the fingers durectly 
touching the face, smce, uncontrolled during sleep and 
dreams, they could after all have touched every possible 
part of the body, the armpits, the behmd, the gemtals. 

The dressing room behind their stage is so narrow that if 
by chance you are standmg in front of the mirror behind 
the pora^re on the set and someone else wants to pass by, 
he must raise the curtain and willy-nilly show himself for 
a moment to the audience. 

Superstition: The evil spirits gain entry into a person 
who drinks out of an imperfect glass. 

How bruised the actors appeared to me after the per- 
formance, how I feared to touch them with a word. How 
instead I quickly left after a hasty handshake, as though I 
were angry and dissatisfied, because the truth of my im- 
pression was so impossible to express. Everyone seemed 
false to me except Max, who quietly made some meaning- 
less remark. And the person who asked about som#* ir- 
relevant detail was false, the person who gave a facetious 



‘ DIARIES I 9 I I liy 

reply to a remark by an actor, the ironic one and the one 
who began to explain his varied impressions, all the rabble 
that had been crowded mto the back of the auditorium 
where it belonged and now, late at night, got up and once 
more became aware of lis importance. (Very far from cor- 
rect.) 

October 28. Of course, I had a similar feeling, but 
neither acting nor play came anywhere near seeming per- 
fect to me that evening. For that very reason I owed the 
actors particular respect. When there are small, even if 
many deficiencies in one’s impression, who knows whose 
fault they are? A'Irs. Tschissik once stepped on the hem of 
her dress and tottered for a moment in her prmcess-style 
hussy’s dress like a massive pillar, once she made a mistake 
in her lines and in order to calm her tongue turned in great 
agitation toward the back wall, despite the fact that this 
did not quite suit the words, it irritated me, but it did not 
prevent the sudden flutter of a shudder upon my cheek- 
bone, which I always feel when I hear her voice But be- 
cause my acquaintances had got a much less pure impres- 
sion than I, they seemed to me to owe even greater respect, 
because in my opinion their respect would have been much 
more Effective than mine, so that I had double reason to 
curse their behavior. 

“Axioms for the Drama” by Max in theSchattbuhne. Has 
quite the character of a dream truth, which the expression 
“axioms” suits too. The more dreamlike it inflates itself, all 
the more*coolly must you seize it. The following princi- 
ples are formulated: 

TJie thesis is, that the essence of the drama lies in a lack. 

The drama (on the stage) is more exhaustive than the 



FRANZ KAFKA 


Il8 

novel, because we see everything about which we other- 
wise just read. 

It only seems to be, for m the novel the author can 
show us only what is miportant, m the drama, on the other 
hand, we see everything, the actor, the settmgs, and so not 
.just what IS important, therefore less. From the pomt of 
view of the novel, therefore, the best drama would be en- 
tirely unstimulating, for example, a philosophical drama 
that would be read by seated actors in any set at all that 
represented a room. 

And yet the best drama is that which is the most stimu- 
' lating m time and space, frees itself of all the demands of 
life, limits itself only to the speeches, to the thoughts in 
the monologues, to the mam points of what happens, 
everything else is left to the stimulation that has been 
aroused, and, raised high on a shield borne by the actors, 
pamters, directors, obeys only its most extreme inspira- 
tions. 

Error in this chain of reasomng: It changes its point of 
view without indicating it, sees thmgs now from the 
writer’s room, now from the audience. Granted that the 
audience does not see everything from the point of view 
of the author, that even he is surprised by the performance 
(October 29, Sunday), it is still the author who had the 
play with all its details withm himself, who moved along 
from detail to detail, and who only because he assembled 
all the details in the speeches has given them dramatic 
weight and force. Because of this the drama m its highest 
development achieves an unbearable humanization which 
it is the task of the actor— with his role blowing loosely and 
in tatters about him— to draw down, to make bearable. The 
drama therefore hovers in the air, but not like a roof car- 
tied along on a storm, rather hke a whole building whose" 



OIASIES I9II II9 

foundation walls have been tom up out of the earth with 
a force which today is still close to madness. 

Sometimes it seems that the play is resting up in the flies, 
the actors have drawnMown strips of it the ends of- which 
they hold m their hands or have wound about their bodies 
for the play, and that only now and then a strip that is diffi- 
cult to release carries an actor, to the terror of the audi- 
ence, up in the air. “ 

I dreamed today of a donkey that looked hke a grey- 
hound, It was very cautious m its movements. I looked at 
it closely because I was aware how unusual a phenomenon 
It was, but remember only that its narrow human feet 
could not please me because of their length and uni- 
formity. I offered it a bunch of fresh, dark-green cypress 
leaves which I had just received from an old Zurich lady 
(it all took place in Zurich), it did not want it, just sniffed 
a little at it; but then, when I left thccypress on a table, it 
devoured it so completely that only a scarcely recogniz- 
able kernel resembling a chestnut was left. Later there was 
talk that this donkey had never yet gone on all fours but 
always held itself erect hke a human bemg and showed its 
silveiy shining breast and its httle belly. But actually that 
was not correct. 

Besides this, I dreamed about an Englishman whom I 
met at a meeting like the one the Salvation Army held in 
Zurich. There were seats there like those in school, under 
the blackboard there was even an open shelf; once when I 
reached-in to straighten something I wondered at the ease 
with which one makes friends on a trip. By this apparently 
wjs meant the Englishman, who shortly thereafter ap- 
’proached me. He had loose, light clothes in very good con- 



120 


FRAN'Z KAFKA 


ditioo, but high up on the back of the arms, instead of the 
material of the clothmg, or at least sewn on over it, there 
was a gray, wrmkled material, hanging a httle, tom in 
strips, stippled as though by spiders, that reimnded one as 
much of the leather re-enforcemencs on ridmg breeches 
as of the sleeve protectors of seamstresses, salesgirls, clerks. 
His face was also covered with a gray material that had 
very clever slits for mouth, eyes, probably also for the 
nose. But this material was new, napped, rather like flan- 
nel, very flexible and soft, of excellent English manufac- 
ture. All this pleased me so, that I was eager to become ac- 
quamted with the man. He wanted to invite me to his 
house too, but since I had to leave as soon as the day after 
tomorrow, that came to nothmg. Before he left the meet- 
ing he put on several more apparently very practical pieces 
of clothing that made him look quite inconspicuous after 
he had buttoned them. Although he could not invite me 
to his home, he nevertheless asked me to go mto the street 
with him. I followed him, we stopped across the street 
from the meeting place on the curb, I below, he above, and 
found again after some discussion that nothing' could be 
done about the invitation. 

Then I dreamed that Max, Otto ** and I had the habit of 
packing our trunks only when we reached the railroad sta- 
tion. There we were, carrying our shirts, for example, 
through the mam hall to our distant trunks. Although this 
seemed to be a general custom, it was not a good one in our 
case, especially since we had begun to pack only shortly 
before the arrival of the train. Then we were naturally ex- 
cited and had hardly any hope of still catching the tram, 
let alone getting good seats. 

Although the regular guests and employees of the * 



' DIARIES I 9 I I I2I 

coffeehouse are fond of the actors, they cannot remain 
respectful amid the depressing mipressions, and despise the 
actors as starvelings, tramps, fellow Jews, exactly as m the 
past. Thus, the headwaiter wanted to throw Lowy out of 
the hall, the doorman, who used to work m a brothel and 
is now a pimp, shouted httle Tschissik down when she^ 
in the excitement of her sympathy during Der Wtlde 
Mensch, wanted to pass something to the actors, and the 
day before yesterday, when I accompamed Lowy back to 
the coffeehouse after he had read me the first act of Gor- 
dm’s Eltezar ben Schema in the City Cafe, that fellow 
called to him (he squmts, and between his crooked, 
pomted nose and his mouth there is a hollow out of which 
a small mustache bristles) : “Come on, idiot. (Allusion to 
the role in Der Wtlde Mensch.) Someone’s wainng. 
There’s a visitor you really don’t deserve. An officer candi- 
date in the artillery is here. Look.” And he points to one of 
the curtamed coffeehouse windows behmd which the oflS- 
cer candidate is allegedly sittmg. Lbwy passes his hand 
over his forehead: “From Ehezar ben Schevia to this.” 

J 

The sight of stairs moves me so today. Early in the day 
already, and several times since, I have enjoyed the sight 
from^my window of the triangular piece cut out of the 
stone railing of the staircase that leads down on the right 
from the Czech Bridge to the quay level. Very steep, as 
though it were giving only a hasty suggestion. And now, 
over there across the river, I see a stepladder on the slope 
that leads down to the water. It has always been there, but 
is revealed only in the autumn and winter by the removal 
of the swimming school in front of it, and it lies there in 
thf dark grass under the brown trees in the play of per- 
'spective. 



122 FRANZ KAFKA 

Lowy: Four young friends became great Talmud 
scholars in their old age. But each had a different fate. One 
became mad, one died, Rabbi Ebezar became a free-thinker 
at forty and only the oldest one, Akiva, who had not begun 
his studies until the age of forty, achieved complete knowl- 
edge. The disciple of Rabbi Eliezar was Rabbi Meyer, a 
pious man whose piety was so great that he was not harmed 
by what the free-thinker taught him. He ate, as he said, the 
kernel of the nut, the shell he thriw away. Once, on Satur- 
day, Ehezar went for a ride. Rabbi Meyer followed on 
foot, the Talmud m his hand, of course only for two thou- 
sand paces, for you are not permitted to go any farther on 
Saturday. And from this walk emerged a symbolic demand 
and the reply to it. Come back to your people, said Rabbi 
Meyer. Rabbi Eliezar refused with a pun. 

October 30. This craving that I almost always have, 
when for once I feel my stomach is healthy, to heap up in 
me notions of terrible deeds of daring with food. I espe- 
cially satisfy this craving in front of pork batchers. If 
I see a sausage that is labeled as an old, hard sausage, I bite 
into It in my imagination with all my teeth and swallow 
quickly, regularly and thoughtlessly, like a machine. The 
despair that this act, even in the imagination, has as its im- 
mediate result, increases my haste. I shove the long slabs of 
rib meat unbitten into my mouth, and then pull them out 
again from behmd, tearing through stomach and intestines. 
I eat dirty delicatessen stores completely empty. Cram my- 
self with herrings, pickles and all the bad, old, sharp foods. 
Bonbons are poured into me hke hail from their tin boxes. 
I enjoy in this way not only my healthy condition but also 
a suffermg that is without pam and can pass at once. 



' DIARIES I 9 I I 123 

It is an old habit of mine, at the point when an impres- 
sion has reached its greatest degree of purity, whether of 
joy or pam, not to allow it to run its salutary course 
through all my being, but rather to cloud and dispel its 
purity by new, unexpected, weak impressions. It is not that 
I eviUy intend my own harm, I am only too weak to bear 
the purity of that impression. Instead of admittmg this 
weakness, which alone would be right, because m reveal- 
ing itself It calls forth other forces to its support, I rather 
quietly and with seeming arbitrariness try to evoke new 
impressions in an effort to help myself. 

On Saturday evening, for example, after hearing Miss 
T.’s*® excellent story, which after all belongs more to 
Max, at least belongs to him to a greater extent than one of 
his own stories, and later after hearing the excellent play 
Konkurrenz by Baum, in which dramatic force can be seen 
in the work and m the effect quite as uninterruptedly as in 
the production of a living cr^tsman, after the hearing of 
both these works I was so cast down and my insides, al- 
ready fairly empty for several days, quite without warning 
filled with "Such deep sorrow that I declared to Max on the 
way home that nothing can come of “Richard and Sam- 
uel.” For this declaration too, not the smallest courage was 
needed at the time, as far as either I or Max was concerned. 
The discussion that followed confused me a little, as “Rich- 
ard and Samuel” was then far from being my chief con- 
cern and I therefore did not find the right answers to 
Max’s objections. But later, when I was alone, and not only 
the disturbance of my sorrow by the conversation but also 
the almost effective consolation of Max’s presence had dis- 
appeared, my hopelessness grew to such an extent that it 
began to dissolve my thinking (at this point, while I am 
topping for dinner, Lowy comes to the house and inter- 



FRANZ KAFKA 


124 

I 

rupts me and delights me from seven to ten o’clock). Still, 
instead of waiting at home for what would happen next, I 
carelessly read two issues of Aktion, a little in Die Missge- 
schickten,-’^ finally also m my Pans notes, and went to bed, 
reallymore content than before, but obdurate. It was the 
fSame several days ago when I returned from a walk and 
found myself imitaung Lowy to such a degree that the 
force of his enthusiasm, externally, worked toward my 
goal. Then, too, I read and spoke a great deal in confusion 
at home and slowly collapsed. 

October 31. Despite the fact that today I have read here 
and there m the Fischer catalogue, in the Insel Almanach, 
in the Rundschau, I am now pretty sure that, whether I 
have assimilated everything either thoroughly or casually, 
I have in any case defended myself against all harm. And I 
should have enough self-confidence tonight if I didn’t 
have to go out with Lowy again. • 

When on Sunday afternoon, just after parsing three 
women, I stepped into Max’s house, I thought: There are 
still one or two houses in which I have something to do, 
there are still women walking behind me who can cee me 
turn in on a Sunday afternoon at a house door in order 
to work, talk, purposefully, hurriedly, only occasionally 
looking at the matter in this way. This must not remain so 
for long. 

I read the stories of Wilhelm Schafer, especially when 
aloud, with the same attentive enjoyment that I should get 
from drawing a piece of twine over my tongue. At first I 
did not like Valli very much yesterday afternoon, but 



‘ DIARIES I 9 I I 125 

after I had lent her Die Missgeschickten and she had al- 
ready read it a little while and must already have been 
properly under the influence of the story, I loved her be- 
cause of this influence and caressed her. 

i 

In order not to forget it, should my father once again 
call me a bad son, I write it down that, m the presence oi 
several relatives, without special occasion, whether it may 
have been simply to put me m my place, whether it was 
supposedly to rescue me, he called Max a “meshuggener 
ritoch”^^ and that yesterday, when Lowy was in my 
room, ironically shaking his body and contortmg his 
mouth, he referred to these strange people who were being 
let into the house, what could interest one in a strange per- 
son, why one enters into such useless relationships, etc. 
After all, I should not have written it down, for I have 
written myself almost into a hatred of my father, for 
which after all he has given no occasion today and which, 
at least as far as Lowy is concerned, is>out of all proportion 
to what I have written down as having been said by my 
father, and which even increases because I cannot remem- 
ber what was really wicked in my father’s behavior yester- 

J 

November i. Today, eagerly and happily began to read 
the History of the Jews by Graetz. Because my desire for 
it had far outrun the reading, it was at first stranger to me 
than I thought, and I had to stop here and there in order by 
resting to allow my Jewishness to collect itself. Toward 
the end^ however, I was already gripped by the imperfec- 
tion of the first settlements in the newly conquered Canaan 
and the faithful handing down of the imperfections of the 
popular heroes (Joshua, the Judges, Elijah). 




FRANZ KAFKA 


126 

Last night, goodbye to Mrs. King. We, I and Lowy, ran 
alongside the tram and saw Mrs King looking out from 
the darkness behind a closed wmdow in the last coach. She 
qmckly stretched her arm toward us while still m her com- 
partment, stood up, opened the window, filhng it for a 
moment with her unbuttoned cloak, until the dark Mr. 

c 

Klug (all he can do is open up his mouth wide and bitterly 
and then snap it shut, as though forever) got up opposite 
her. During the fifteen minutes I spoke very little to Mr. 
Klug and looked at him for perhaps only two seconds, 
otherwise I could not, during the weak, uninterrupted 
conversation, turn my eyes away from Mrs. Klug. She was 
completely under the domination of presence, but 
more m her imagination than in reality. When she turned 
to Lowy with the repeated introductory phrase, “You, 
Lowy,” she spoke to me, when she leaned close against her 
husband who sometimes left her with only her right shoul- 
der showing at the window and pressed against her dress 
and her baggy overcoat, she was attempting in that way to 
make me an empty sign. 

The first impression I had at the performances, that she 
did not like me especially, was probably correct, she sel- 
dom invited me to sing with her, when, without real feel- 
ing, she asked me something, I unfortunately answered m- 
correctly (“Do you understand that^” “Yes,” I said, but 
she wanted “No” in order to reply, “Neither do I”); she 
did not offer me her picture postcards a second time, I pre- 
ferred Mrs. Tschissik, to whom I wanted to give some 
flowers in order to spite Mrs. Klug. To this disinclination, 
however, was joined a respect for my doctorate which was 
not impaired by my childish appearance, indeed, it was 
even increased by it. This respect was so great and it be- 
came so articulate in her frequent but by no means par-** 



’ DIARIES I 9 I I 127 

ticularly stressed way of addressing me— “You know, Herr 
Doktor”— that I half unconsciously regretted that I de- 
served It so little and asked myself whether I had a right to 
be addressed like that by everyone. But while I w as so re- 
spected by her as a person, as a spectator I was even more 
respected. I beamed when she sang, I laughed and looked 
at her all the time while she was on the stage, I sang the 
tunes with her, later the words, I thanked her after several 
performances, because of* this, again, she naturally hked 
me very well. But if she spoke to me out of this feehng I 
was so embarrassed that she undoubtedly fell back into her 
original dismchnauon and remained there. She had to exert 
herself all the more to reward me as a spectator, and she 
was glad to do it because she is a vam actress and a good- 
natured woman. 

She looked at me, especially when she was silent up there 
in the window of the compartment, with a mouth raptur- 
ously contorted by embarrassment and slyness and with 
twinkling eyes that swam on the wrinkles spreading from 
her mouth. She must have beheved I loved her, as was in- 
deed true, 4nd with these glances she gave me the sole ful- 
filment that a young but experienced woman, a good wife 
and mother, could give to a doctor of her imagination. 
These ^fiances were so urgent, and were supported by ex- 
pressions hke “There were such nice guests here, especially 
some of them,” that 1 defended myself, and those were the 
moments when I looked at her husband. I had, when I 
compared the two, an unjustified sense of astonishment at 
the fact that they should depart from us together and yet 
concern themselves only with us and have no glance for 
one another. Lowy asked whether they had good seats. 
“Yes, if it remains as empty as this,” Mrs. Klug answered, 
ahd looked casually into the inside of the compartment the 



128 


FRANZ KAFKA 


warm air of which her husband will spoil with his smoking. 
We spoke of their children for whose sake they were leav- 
ing; they have four children, three boys among them, the 
oldest IS nine years old, they haven’t seen them for eighteen 
months now. When a gentleman got hurriedly into a 
nearby compartment, the tram seemed about to leave, we 
quickly said goodbye, shook each other’s hands, I tipped 
my hat and then held it against my chest, we stepped back 
as one does when trams leave, by which one means to show 
that everything is fimshed and one has come to terms with 
it. The tram did not leave yet, however, we stepped up 
close again, I was rather happy about it, she asked after my 
sisters. Surprismgly, the tram began to move slowly. Mrs. 
Klug prepared to wave her handkerchief, I must write her, 
she called, do I know her address, she was already too far 
away for me to be able to answer her, I pointed to Lowy 
from whom I could get the address, that’s good, she 
nodded to me and him quickly, and let her handkerchief 
float in the wind, I tipped my hat, at first awkwardly, then, 
the farther away she was, the more freely. 

Later I remembered that I had had the impression that 
the tram was not really leaving but only moving the short 
length of the railroad station in order to put on a play for 
us, and then was swallowed up. In a doze that samte eve- 
ning, Mrs. Klug appeared to me unnaturally short, almost 
without legs, and wrung her hands with her face distorted 
as though a great misfortune had befallen her. 

This afternoon the pain occasioned by my loneliness 
came upon me so piercingly and intensely that T became 
aware that the strength which I gain through this writing 
thus spends itself, a strength which I certainly have not 
intended for this purpose. 



‘ DIARIES 191I 129 

As soon as Mr. King comes to a new aty one can see 
how his and his wife’s jewels disappear into the paMUshop. 
As their departure draws near he gradually redeems them 
again. 

Favorite saying of the wife of the philosopher Mendels- 
sohn TFie imes tst vnr vor tout runivers! * 

One of the most important impressions at the departure 
of Mrs. Klug- 1 was always forced to think that, as a simple 
middle-class woman, she holds herself by force below the 
level of her true human destiny and requires only a jump, a 
tearing open of the door, a tumed-up hght, m order to be 
an actress and to subjugate me. Actually, even, she stood 
above and I below, as m the theater.— She married at six- 
teen, IS twenty-six years old. 

November 2 . This morning, for the first time in a long 
rime, the joy agam of imagimng a kiufe twisted in my 
heart. 

In the 'newspapers, in conversation, in the oflice, the 
impetuosity of language often leads one astray, also the 
hope, springing from temporaty weakness, for a sudden 
and stronger illumination in the very next moment, also 
mere strong self-confidence, or mere carelessness, or a great 
present impression that one wishes at any cost to shift into 
the future, also the opinion that true enthusiasm in the 
present justifies any future confusion, also delight in sen- 
tences that are elevated in the middle by one or two jolts 
and open the mouth gradually to its fuD size even if they 
let it close much too quickly and tortuously, also the slight 
possibility of a •decisive and clear judgment, or the effort 
"to give further flow to the speech that has really ended. 



FRANZ KAFKA 


130 

also the desire to escape from the subject in a hurry, 
one’s belly if it must be, or despair that seeks a way out for 
its heavy breath, or the longing for a light without shadow 
—all this can lead one astray to sentences like “The book 
which I have ]ust finished is the most beautiful I have ever 
read,” or, “is more beautiful than any I have ever read.” 

In order to prove that everything I write and think about 
them is false, the actors (aside from Mr. and Mrs. Klug) 
have again remained here, as Lowy, whom I met yesterday 
evening, told me, who knows whether for the same reason 
they will not depart again today, for Lowy did not call at 
the office despite the fact that he promised to. 

November 3 In order to prove that both things that I 
wrote were false, a proof that seems almost impossible, 
Lowy himself came yesterday evenmg and interrupted me 
while I was writing. 

N.’s habit of repeating everything in the same tone of 
voice. He tells someone a story about his business, of course 
not with so many details that it would in itself completely 
kill the story, but nevertheless in a slow manner, thorough 
only because of that, it is a communication which is not 
intended to be anything else and is therefore domS" with 
when it is finished. A short time passes with something else, 
suddenly he finds a transition to his story and produces it 
again in its old form, almost without additions, but also 
almost without omissions, with the innocence of a person 
who carries about the room a ribbon that someone has 
treacherously tied to his back. Now my parents like him 
particularly, therefore feel his habit more strongly than 
they notice it, and so it happens that they, especially my 
mother, unconsciously give him opportunities to repeat. If 



' DIARIES I 9 I I 13I 

some evening the moment for repeatmg a story cannot 
quite be found, then Mother is there, she asks a question, 
and indeed with a curiosity that does not end even after 
the question is asked, as one might expect. As for stories 
that have already been repeated and could not return again 
by their own strength. Mother hunts after them with hey 
questions even several evenings later. N.’s habit is, however, 
so obsessive that it often has the power to jusufy itself com- 
pletely. No one else gets with such regular frequency into 
the position of having to tell members of the family in- 
dividually a story that basically concerns all of them. The 
story must then be told, almost as often as there are persons, 
to the family circle that in such cases assembles slowly, at 
intervals, one person at a time. And because I am the one 
who alone has recognized N.’s habit, I am also usually the 
one who hears the story ijirst and for whom the repetitions 
provide only the small pleasure of confirming an observa- 
tion. 

Envy at nominal success of Baum whom I really like so 
much. Wifh this, the feeling of having in the middle of my 
body a ball of wool that quickly winds itself up, its innu- 
merable threads pulling from the surface of my body to 
itself. 

Lowy. My father about him; “Whoever lies down -with 
dogs gets up with fleas.” I could not contain myself and said 
something uncontrolled. To which Father with unusual 
quietness (to be sure, after a long interval which was other- 
wise occupied) “You know that I should not get excited 
and must be treated with consideration. And now you speak 
to me hke that I really have enough excitement, quite 
ehough. So don’t bother me with such talk.” I say “I make 



132 FRANZ KAFKA ‘ 

every effort to restrain myself,” and sense in my father, as 
always in such extreme moments, the existence of a wisdom 
of which I can grasp only a breath. 

Death of Lowy’s grandfather, a man who had an open 
Ijand, knew several languages, had made long journeys deep 
into Russia and who once on a Saturday refused to eat at 
the house of a wonder-rabbi in Ekaterinoslav because the 
long hair and colored neckerchief of the rabbi’s son made 
him suspect the piety of the house. 

The bed was set up m the middle of the room, the candle- 
sticks were borrowed from friends and relatives, the room 
therefore full of the light and smoke of the candles Some 
forty men stood around his bed all day to receive inspira- 
tion from the death of a pious man He was conscious until 
the end and at the right moment, his hand on his breast, he 
began to repeat the death prayers During his suffering and 
after his death the grandmother, who was with the women 
gathered in the nexc’room, wept incessantly, but while he 
was dying she was completely calm because it is a com- 
mandment to ease the death of the dying man ^s much as 
one can. “With his own prayers he passed away.” He was 
much envied for this death that followed so pious a hfe. 

Pesach festival. An association of rich Jews rents a bak- 
ery, its members take over for the heads of the families all 
the tasks of producing the so-called eighteen-mmute mat- 
zos- the fetching of water, the koshering, the kneading, the 
cutting, the piercing. 

I 

November 5. Yesterday slept, with Lowy after Bar 
Kokhba from seven on, read a letter from his father. Eve- 
ning at Baum’s. 



' D lARIES 1911 133 

I want to write, with a constant trembling on my fore- 
head. I sit in my room in the verj' headquarters of the up- 
roar of the entire house. I hear all the doors close, because 
of their noise only the footsteps of those running between 
them are spared me, I liear even the slamming of the oven 
door in the kitchen. My father bursts through the doors of 
my room and passes through in his dragging dressmg 
gown, the ashes are scraped out of the stove m the next 
room, Valh asks, shouting into the indefinite through the 
anteroom as though through a Paris street, whether Fa- 
ther’s hat has been brushed yet, a hushing that claims to be 
friendly to me raises the shout of an answering voice. The 
house door is unlatched and screeches as though from a 
catarrhal throat, then opens wider with the brief singing 
of a woman’s voice and closes with a dull manly )erk that 
sounds most inconsiderate My father is gone, now begins 
the more delicate, more distracted, more hopeless noise led 
by the voices of the two cananes I had already thought of 
It before, but \\ ith the canaries it comes back to me again, 
that I might open the door a narrow crack, crawl into the 
next roorn like a snake and in that way, on the floor, beg 
my sisters and their governess for quiet. 

Th6 bitterness I felt yesterday evening when Max read 
my little automobile story at Baum’s. I w'as isolated from 
everyone and in the face of the story I kept my chin 
pressed against my breast, as it were. The disordered sen- 
tences of this story with holes into which one could stick 
both hands; one sentence sounds high, one sentence sounds 
low, as t'he case may be; one sentence rubs against another 
bke the tongue against a hollow or false tooth; one sen- 
tence comes marching up with so rough a start that the 
entire story falls into sulky amazement; a sleepy imitation 



FRAXZ KAFKA 


01 Max (reproaches muffled— stirred up) seesaws in, some- 
times It looks like a dancmg course during its first quarter- 
hour. I explain it to myself by saying that I have too httle 
time and quiet to draw out of me all the possibilities of my 
talent. For that reason it is only disconnected starts that 
always make an appearance, disconnected starts, for in- 
stance, all through the automobile story. If I were ever able 
to write somethmg large and whole, well shaped from be- 
ginnmg to end, then in the end the story would never be 
able to detach itself from me and it would be possible for 
me calmly and with open eyes, as a blood relation of a 
healthy story, to hear it read, but as it is, every little piece 
of the story runs around homeless and drives me away 
from it in the opposite direction.— At the same time I can 
still be happy if this explanation is correct. 

Performance of Goldfaden’s Bar Kokhba. False judg- 
ment of the play throughout the hall and on the stage. 

I had brought along a bouquet for Mrs. Tschissik, with 
an attached visiting card inscribed “in gratitude,” and 
waited for the moment when I could have it presented to 
her. The performance had begun late, Mrs. Tschissik’s big 
scene was promised me only m the fourth act, in impa- 
tience and fear that the flowers might wilt I had them un- 
wrapped by the waiter as early as during the third act (it 
was eleven o’clock), they lay on a table, the kitchen help 
and several dirty regular guests handed them from one to 
another and smelled them, I could only look on worriedly 
and angrily, nothing else, I loved Mrs. Tschissik during her 
big scene in the prison, but still, I was anxious for her to 
bring it to its end, finally the act, unnoticed by me in my 
distraction, was finished, the headwaiter handed up the 
flowers, Mrs. Tschissik took them between final curtairiS, 



•' DIARIES 1911 13 J 

she bowed in a narrow opening of the curtiins and did not 
return again. No one noticed my love and I had intended 
to reveal it to all and so make it valuable in the eyes of Mrs. 
Tschissik, the bouquet was hardly noticed. Meanwhile it 
was already past two b ’clock, everyone was tired, several 
people had already left, I should have enjoyed throwing 
my glass at them. 

With me was Comptroller P. from our firm, a Gentile. 
He, whom I usually like,xlisturbed me. My worry was the 
flowers, not his affairs. At the same time I knew that he 
understood the play incorrectly, while I had no time, de- 
sire or ability to force upon him assistance which he did 
not think he needed. Finally I was ashamed of myself be- 
fore him because I myself was paymg so little attention. 
Also he disturbed me in my conversation with Max and 
even by the recollection that I had liked him before, would 
again like him afterward, and that he could take my be- 
tjavior today amiss. 

But not only I was disturbed. Max felt responsible be- 
cause of his laudatory article in the paper. It was getting 
too late for the Jews in Bcrgmann’s convoy. The members 
of the Bar Kokhba Associaaon had come because of the 
name of the play and could not help being disappointed. 
From? what I know of Bar Kokhba from this play, I would 
not have named any association after him. In the back of 
the hall there were tivo shopgurls in their best clothes with 
their sweethearts and had to be silenced by loud shouts 
during the death scenes. Finally people on the street struck 
the huge panes in annoyance that they saw so little of the 
stage. . 

The two Klugs were missing from the stage. Ridiculous 
extras. “Vulgar Jews,” as Ldwy said. Traveling salesmen 
"^o weren’t paid. Most of the tme they were concerned 



FRANZ KAFKA 


136 

only with concealing their laughter or enjoying it, even if 
aside from this they meant well. A round-cheeked fellow 
with a blond beard at the sight of whom you could 
scarcely keep from laughing looked especially funny when 
he laughed. His false beard shook unnaturally, because of 
his laughter it was no longer pasted in its right place on his 
Cheeks. Another fellow laughed only when he wanted to, 
but then a lot. When Lowy died, singing, in the arms of 
these two elders and was supposed to slip slowly to earth 
with the fading song, they put their heads together behind 
his back in order finally to be able to laugh their fill for 
once, unseen by the audience (as they thought). Yester- 
day, when I remembered it at lunch, I still had to laugh. 

Mrs. Tschissik in prison must take the helmet off the 
drunken Roman governor (young Pipes) who is visiting 
her and then put it on herself. When she takes it off, a 
crushed towel falls out which Pipes had apparently stuffed 
in because the helmet pinched too much. Although he 
certainly must have tnown that the helmet would be taken 
off his head on the stage, he looks reproachfully at Mrs. 
Tschissik, forgetting his drunkenness. 

Beautiful the way Mrs. Tschissik, under the hands of 
the Roman soldiers (whom, however, she first had to p\dl 
to her, for they obviously were afraid to touch- her), 
writhed while the movements of the three actors by her 
care and art almost, only almost, followed the rhythm of 
the singing; the song m which she proclaims the appear- 
ance of the Messiah, and, without destroying the illusion, 
sheerly by the spell she casts, represents the playing of a 
harp by the motions of bowing a violin, in thp prison 
where at the frequent approach of footsteps she breaks 
off her song of lamentation, hurries to her treadmill and 
turns it to the accompaniment of a work song, then again 



> DIARIES I9I I 137 

escapes to her song and again to the mill, th6 way she sings 
in her sleep \\ hen Fapus visits her and her mouth is open 
like a nvmklmg eye, the way m general the comers of her 
mouth m opening remind one of the comers of her eyes. 
In the white veil, as in the black, she was beautiful. 

New among her familiar gestures: pressmg her hand 
deep mto her not verj” good bodice, abmpt shmg of her 
shoulders and hips in scorn, especially when she turns her 
back on the one scorned. * 

She led the whole performance hke the mother of a 
family. She prompted ever\'one but never faltered herself; 
she instmcted the e.\tras, implored them, finally shoved 
them if need be, her clear voice, when she was off stage, 
joined in the ragged chorus on stage, she held up the fold- 
ing screen (which in the last act was supposed to represent 
a citadel) that the extras would have knocked down ten 
timeaa 

, >jm||^oped, by means of the bouquet of flowers, to ap- 
pease'my love for her a little, it was quite useless. It is pos- 
sible only through literature or through sleeping together. 
I write this not because I did not know it, but rather be- 
cause it IS perhaps well to write down warmngs frequently. 

Noifember 7 Tuesday. Yesterday the actors and Mrs. 
Tschissik finally left. I w'ent w'lth Lowy to the coffee- 
house in the evening, but w'aited outside, did not want to 
go in, did not want to see Mrs. Tschissik But while I was 
walking up and down I saw her open the door and come 
out with Lowy, I w'ent tow'ard them with a greeting and 
met them in the middle of the street. Mrs. Tschissik 
thanked me for my bouquet in the grand but natural vo- 
cables of her speech, she had only just now learned that it 
XVas from me. This liar Lowy had therefore said nothing to 



FRANZ KAFKA 


138 

her. I was worried about her because she was wearing only 
a thin, dark blouse with short sleeves and I asked her— I 
almost touched her m order to force her— to go into the 
restaurant so that she would not catch cold. No, she said, 
she does not catch cold, mdeed she has a shawl, and she 
raised it a little to show it and then drew it together more 
closely about her breast. I could not tell her that I was not 
really concerned about her but was rather only happy to 
have found an emotion in which I could enjoy my love, 
and therefore I told her again that I was worried. 

Meanwhile her husband, her little girl and Mr. Pipes had 
also come out and it turned out that it had by no means 
been decided that they would go to Brunn as Lowy had 
convinced me, on the contrary. Pipes was even deter- 
mined to go to Nuremberg. That would be best, a hall 
would be easy to get, the Jewish community is large, more- 
over, the trip to Leipzig and Berlin very comfortable. 
Furthermore they had discussed it all day and Lowy, who 
had slept until fourj had simply kept them waiting and 
made them miss the seven-thirty for Brunn. Amidst these 
arguments we entered the tavern and sat down at a table, 
I across from Mrs Tschissik. I should so have liked to dis- 
tmguish myself, this would not have been so difficult, I 
should just have had to know several train connections, tell 
the railroad stations apart, bring about a choice between 
Nuremberg and Brunn, but chiefly shout down Pipes who 
was behaving like his Bar Kokhba. To Pipes’ shouting 
Lowy very reasonably, if unintentionally, counterposed a 
very quick, uninterruptable chatter in his normal voice 
that was, at least for me, rather incomprehensible at the 
time So instead of distinguishing myself I sat sunk in my 
chair, looked from Pipes to Lowy, and only now and thm 
caught Mrs. Tschissik’s eye on the way, but when she an- 



I DIARIES I 9 I I 139 

) 

swered me with her glance (when she smiled at me because 
of Pipes’ excitement, for instance) I looked away. This had 
its sense. Between us there could be no smiling at Pipes’ ex- 
citement Facing her, I was too serious for this, and quite 
ored by this seriousness. If I wanted to laugh at somethmg 

I could look across her shoulder at the fat woman who had 

• 

played the governor’s wife in Bar Kokhba. But really I 
could not look at her seriously either. For that would have 
meant that I loved her Even young Pipes behind me, m all 
his innocence, would have had to recognize that And that 
would have been really unheard of A young man whom 
everyone takes to be eighteen years old declares in the 
presence of the evening’s guests at the Cafe Savoy, amidst 
the surrounding waiters, in the presence of the table full of 
actors, declares to a thirty-year-old woman w'hom hardly 
anyone even considers pretty, who has two children, ten 
and eight years old, whose husband is sitting beside her, 
who IS a model of respectability and economy— declares to 
this woman his love to which he has completely fallen vic- 
tim and, now comes the really remarkable part which of 
course no one else would have observed, immediately re- 
nounces the woman, just as he would renounce her if she 
were ypung and single. Should I be grateful or should I 
curse the fact that despite all misfortune I can still feel love, 
an unearthly love but still for earthly objects. 

Mrs. Tschissik was beautiful yesterday. The really nor- 
mal beauty of small hands, of light fingers, of rounded 
forearms which in themselves are so perfect that even the 
unaccustomed sight of this nakedness does not make one 
think of the rest of the body. The hair separated into two 
waves, brightly illumined by the gaslight. Somewhat bad 
complexion around the right comer of her mouth. Her 



FRANZ KAFKA 


140 

mouth opens as though m childish complaint, running 
above and below into dehcately shaped curves, one im- 
agmes that the beautiful shapmg of v, ords, u hich spreads 
the light of the vowels throughout the words and preserves 
their pure contours with the tip of the tongue, can succeed 
only once, and admires how everlasting it is. Low, white 
forehead. The powdering that I have so far seen I hate, but 
if this white color, this somewhat cloudy milk-colored veil 
hovering low over the skin is the result of powder, then 
every woman should powder. She hkes to hold two fingers 
to the right comer of her mouth, perhaps she even stuck 
the tips of her fingers mto her mouth— yes, perhaps she 
even put a toothpick into her mouth, I didn’t look closely 
at these fingers, but it seemed almost as though she were 
poking in a hollow tooth with a toothpick and let it stay 
there a quarter of an hour. 

November 8. All afternoon at the laivyer’s about the 
factory. 

The girl who only because she was walking arm in arm 
with her sweetheart looked quietly around. 

The clerk in N.’s office reminded me of the actress who 
played Manette Salomon at the Odeon in Paris a year and a 
half ago. At least when she was sitting. A soft bosom, 
broader than it was high, encased in a woolly material. A 
broad face down to the mouth, but then rapidly narrow- 
ing. Neglected, natural curls in a flat hair-do. Zeal and 
calm in a strong body. The resemblance was strengthened 
too, as I see now, because she worked on unmoved (the 
keys flew— Oliver system— on her typewriter like old-time 
knitting needles), also walked about, but scarcely spdke 



) DIARIES I 9 I I I 4 I 

two words in half an hour, as though she hadf Alanette Salo- 
mon Muthin her. 

When I was waiting at the lawyer’s I looked at the one 
typist and thought how hard it was to make out her face 
e\'en while looking at it. The relationship betw een a hair- 
do standing out almost at the same distance all around her 
head, and the straight nose that most of the time seemed 
too long, w as especially confusing WTien the girl who was 
reading a document made a more strikmg movement, I was 
almost confounded by the observauon that through my 
contemplauon I had remained more of a stranger to the 
gul than if I had brushed her skirt with my little finger. 

When the lawTer, in readmg the agreement [about the 
shares in the factory’] to me, came to a passage concerning 
my possible future wife and possible children, I saw across 
from me a table with two large chairs and a smaller one 
arpund it. At the thought that I should never be m a posi- 
tion to seat m these or anv other three chairs myself, my 
wife and mv child, there came over me a yearning for this 
happiness so despairing from the very' start that in m\’ ex- 
citement I asked the lawyer the only question I had left 
after the long reading, w hich at once revealed my com- 
plete iflisunderstanding of a rather long section of the 
agreement that had just been read. 

Continuation of the farew’ell; In Pipes, because I felt 
oppressed by him, I saiv first of all the jagged and darkly 
spotted tips of his teeth. Finally’ I got half an idea* “Why 
go as far as Nuremberg in one jump^” I asked. “Why not 
gjive one or two performances at a smaller way’ station?” 

“Do you know one^ ” asked Mrs. Tschissik, not nearly as 
sharply as I write it, and in this way forced me to look at 



FRANZ KAFKA 


142 

her. All that part of her body which was visible above the 
table, all the roundness of shoulders, back and breast, was 
soft despite her (in European dress, on the stage) bony, 
almost coarse build. Ridiculously, I mentioned Pilsen. 
Some regular guests at the next table very reasonably men- 
tioned Teplitz. Mr. Tschissik would have been in favor of 
any way station, he has confidence only in small under- 
takings, Mrs. Tschissik agreed without their having con- 
sulted much with one another,* aside from that she asks 
around about the fares. Several times they said that if they 
just earned enough for pmnusse,^^ it would be sufficient. 
Her daughter rubs her cheek against her arm; she certainly 
does not feel it, but to the adult there comes the childish 
conviction that nothing can happen to a child who is with 
its parents, even if they are traveling actors, and that if you 
think about it, real troubles are not to be met with so close 
to the earth but only at the height of an adult’s face. I was 
very much in favor of Teplitz because I could give them, a 
letter of recommendation to Dr. P. and so use my influence 
for Mrs. Tschissik. In face of the objection of Pipes, who 
himself prepared the lots to be drawn for the three possible 
cities and conducted the drawing with great liveliness, 
Teplitz was drawn for the third time. I went to the next 
table and excitedly wrote the letter of recommendation. I 
took my leave with the excuse that I had to go home to get 
the exact address of Dr. P., which was not necessary, how- 
ever, and which they didn’t know at home, either. In em- 
barrassment, while Lowy prepared to accompany me, I 
played with the hand of the woman, the chin of her little 
girl. 

November 9. A dream the day before yesterday Every- 
thing theater, I now up in the balcony, now on the stage, a 



'DIARIES I 9 I I 143 

girl whom I had liked a few months ago ’was playing a 
part, tensed her lithe body when she held on to the back 
of a chair in terror, from the balcony I pointed to the girl 
who was playing a male role, my companion did not like 
her. In one act the set was so large that nothing else was to 
be seen, no stage, no auditorium, no dark, no foothghts; 
instead, great crowds of spectators were on the set which 
represented the Altstadter Ring, probably seen from the 
opening of Niklasstrasse Although one should really not 
have been able to see the square m front of the Rathaus 
clock and the small Ring, short turns and slow rockings of 
the stage floor nevertheless made it possible to look down, 
for example, on the small Ring from Kinsky Palace. This 
had no purpose except to show the whole set whenever 
possible, since it was already there m such perfection any- 
how, and since it would have been a crying shame to miss 
seeing any of this set which, as I was well aware, was the 
njost beautiful set in all the world and of all time. The 
lightmg was that of dark, autumnal clouds. The hght of 
the dimmed sun was scatteredly reflected from one or an- 
other stained-glass window on the southeast side of the 
square. Since everything was executed in life size and with- 
out the smallest false detail, the fact that some of the case- 
ment \(^indows were blown open and shut by the slight 
breeze without a sound because of the great height of the 
houses, made an overwhelming impression. The square 
was very steep, the pavement almost black, the Tein 
Church was in its place, but in front of it was a small im- 
perial castle in the courtyard of which all the monuments 
that ordinarily stood in the square were assembled in per- 
fect order- the Pillar of St. Mary, the old fountain in front 
of the Rathaus that I myself have never seen, the fountain 
before the Niklas Church, and a board fence that has now 



FRANZ KAFKA 


144 

been put up ai'ound the excavation for the Hus memorial. 

They acted— m the audience one often forgets that it is 
only acDng, how much truer is this on the stage and behind 
the scenes— an imperial fete and a revolution. The revolu- 
tion, with huge throngs of people sent back and forth, was 
probably greater than anythmg that ever took place in 
Prague, they had apparently located it m Prague only be- 
cause of the set, although really it belonged in Pans Of the 
fete one saw nothing at first, in any event, the court had 
ridden off to a fete, meanwhile the revolution had broken 
out, the people had forced its way into the castle, I myself 
ran out into the open right over the ledges of the fountain 
in the churchyard, but it was supposed to be impossible 
for the court to return to the castle Then the court car- 
riages came from Eisengasse at so wild a pace that they had 
to brake while still far from the castle entrance, and slid 
across the pavement with locked wheels. They were the 
sort of carnages— one sees them at festivals and proces- 
sions— on which living tableaux are shown, they were 
therefore flat, hung with garlands of flowers, and from the 
carnage floors a colored cloth covering the wheels hung 
down all around One was all the more aware of the terror 
that their speed indicated. As though unconsciously, the 
horses, which reared before the entrance, pulled tiie car- 
nages in a curve from Eisengasse to the castle. Just then 
many people streamed past me out into the square, mostly 
spectators whom 1 knew from the street and who perhaps 
had arrived this very moment. Among them there was also 
a girl I know, but I do not know which, beside her walked 
a young, elegant man in a yellowish-brown ulster with 
small checks, his right hand deep in his pocket. They 
walked toward Niklasstrasse. From this moment on I saw 
nothing more. 



’ DIARIES I9I I I^ 

Schiller some place or other: The chief thing is (or 
something similar) “to transform emotion into character.”'^ 

November 11. Satijrday. Yesterday all afternoon at 
Max’s. Decided on the sequence of the essays for “The 
Beauty of Ugly Pictures." Without good feeling. It is jusj: 
then, however, that Max loves me most, or does it only 
seem so because then I am so clearly conscious how little 
deserving I am No, he re'ally loves me more. He wants to 
include my “Brescia” in the book too.®® Everything good 
in me struggles against it. I was supposed to go to Brunn 
with him today. Everything bad and weak in me held me 
back. For I cannot believe that I shall reaUy write some- 
thing good tomorrow. 

The girls, tightly wrapped up in their work aprons, es- 
pecially behind. One at Lowy’s and Winterberg’s this 
morning whose apron flaps, which clpsed only on her be- 
hmd, did not tie together as they usually do, but instead 
closed over each other so that she was wrapped up like a 
child in swaddling clothes. Sensual impression like that 
which, even unconsciously, I always had of children in 
swaddling clothes who are so squeezed in their wrappings 
and beds and so laced with ribbons, quite as though to 
satisfy one’s lust. 

Edison, in an American interview, told of his trip 
through Bohemia, in his opinion the relatively higher de- 
velopment of Bohemia (in the suburbs there are broad 
streets, gardens in front of the houses, in traveling through 
the country you sec factories being built) is due to the fact 
that the emigration of Czechs to America is so large, and 



FRANZ KAFKA 


146 , 

that those returning from there one by one bring new am- 
bition back. 

As soon as I become aware in any way that I leave abuses 
undisturbed which it was really mtended that I should cor- 
rect (for example, the extremely satisfied, but from my 
pomt of view dismal hfe of my married sister), I lose all 
sensation in my arm muscles for a moment. 

I will try, gradually, to group everything certain in me, 
'later the credible, then the possible, etc. The greed for 
books is certain m me. Not really to own or to read them, 
but rather to see them, to convince myself of their actuality 
in the stalls of a bookseller. If there are several copies of the 
same book somewhere, each mdividual one delights me. It 
is as though this greed came from my stomach, as though 
it were a perverse appetite Books that I own delight me 
less, but books belonging to my sisters do delight me. The 
desire to own them is incomparably less, it is almost absent. 

November 12. Sunday. Yesterday lecture by Richepin- 
“La legende de Napoleon” in the Rudolphinum. Pretty 
empty. As though on sudden mspiration to test the manners 
of the lecturer, a large piano is standing in the way between 
the small entrance door and the lecturer’s table The lec- 
turer enters, he wants, with his eyes on the audience, to 
reach his table by the shortest route, therefore comes close 
to the piano, is startled, steps back and walks around it 
softly without looking at the audience again. In the en- 
thusiasm at the end of his speech and in the loud applause, 
he naturally forgot the piano, as it did not call attention to 
itself during the lecture. With his hands on his chest he 
wants to turn his back on the audience as late as possible. 



' ^ DIARIES I 9 I I 147 

therefore takes several elegant steps to the»side, naturally 
bumps gently into the piano and, on tiptoe, must arch his 
back a httle before he gets mto the clear again. At least that 
is the way Richepin did it. 

A tall, powerful maii> of fifty with a waistline. His hair is 
stiflF and tousled (Daudet’s, for example) although pressed 
fairly close to his skull. Like all old Southerners with theilr 
thick nose and the broad, wrinkled face that goes with it, 
from whose nostrils a strong wmd can blow as from a 
horse’s muzzle, and of whom you know very well that 
this is the final state of their faces, it will not be replaced 
but will endure for a long time, his face also reminded me 
of the face of an elderly Italian woman wearing a very 
natural, definitely not false beard. 

The freshly painted light gray of the podium rising be- 
hind him was distracting at first. His white hair blended 
with the color and there was no outline to be seen. When 
he bent his head back the color was set in motion, his head 
almost sank in it. Only toward the iqiddle of the lecture, 
when your attention was fully concentrated, did this dis- 
turbance come to an end, especially when he raised his 
large, black-clad body durmg a recitation and, with wav- 
ing hands, conducted the verses and put the gray color to 
flighnyln the beginning he was embarrassing, he scattered 
so many compliments in all directions. In telling about a 
Napoleonic soldier whom he had known personally and 
who had had fifty-seven wounds, he remarked that the 
variety of colors on the torso of this man could have been 
imitated only by a great colorist such as his friend Mucha, 
who was present. 

I observed in myself a continual increase in the degree to 
which I am affected by people on a podium. I gave no 
thought to my pains and cares. I was squeezed into the left 



FRANZ KAFKA 


148 

comer of my chair, but really mto the lecture, my clasped 
hands between my knees. I felt that Richcpm had an effect 
upon me such as Solomon must have felt when he took 
young girls into his bed. I even had a slight vision of Napo- 
leon who, m a connected fantasy, also stepped through 
the little entrance door although he could really have 
stepped out of the wood of the podium or out of the organ. 
He overwhelmed the entire hall, which was tightly packed 
at that moment. Near as I actually was to him, I had and 
would have had even in reahty never a doubt of his effect. 
I should perhaps have noticed any absurdity in his dress, as 
in the case of Richepin as well, but noticing it would not 
have disturbed me How cool I had been, on the other hand, 
as a child' I often wished to be brought face to face with 
the Emperor to show him how little effect he had. And that 
was not courage, it was just coolness. 

He recited poems as though they were speeches in the 
Chamber. An impotent onlooker at battles, he pounded the 
table, he flung out hic outstretched arms to clear a path for 
the guards through the middle of the hall, “Empereur! ” he 
shouted, with his raised arm become a banner, and in re- 
peating It made it echo as though an army was shouting 
down in the plain. During the description of a battle, a 
httle foot kicked against the floor somewhere, the ^natter 
was looked into, it was his foot that had had too httle con- 
fidence in itself. But it did not disturb him. After “The 
Grenadiers,” which he read in a translation by Gerard de 
Nerval and which he thought very highly of, there was 
the least applause. 

In his youth the tomb of Napoleon had been opened 
once a year and the embalmed face was displayed to dis- 
abled soldiers filing past in procession; ±e face was bloated 



< DIARIES 1911 

and greenish, more a spectacle of terror than of a^iira- 
tion; this is w hy they later stopped opening the tomb. But 
nevertheless ’Richepm sau the face from the arm of his 
granduncle, who had served m Africa and for whose sake 
the Commandant opened the tomb. 

He announces long in advance that a poem he intends to 
recite ^he has an infallible memory, which a strong temper- 
ament must really always have), discusses it, the conung 
verses already cause a small earthquake under his words, in 
the case of the first poem he even said he would recite it 
with all his fire He did. 

He brought things to a climax m the last poem bv getting 
imperceptibly into the verses (by Victor Hugo), standing 
up slowly, not sitting down again even after he finished the 
verses, picking up and carrying on the sweeping move- 
ments of the recitanon with the final force of his own prose. 
He closed with the vow that even after a thousand years 
epch gram of dust of his corpse, if it should have conscious- 
ness, would be ready to answer the call of Napoleon. 

The French, short-winded from the quick succession of 
its escaping breaths, v ithstood even the most unskilful im- 
provisations, did not break down even under his frequent 
talking about poets who beaunfy everj'day life, about his 
own iiJiagination (eves closed) being that of a poet’s, about 
his hallucinations (eyes reluctantly wrenched open on the 
distance) being those of a poet’s, etc. At the same time he 
sometimes covered his eyes and then slowly uncovered 
them, talung away one finger after another. 

He served in the army, his uncle in Africa, his grand- 
father under Napoleon, he even sang two lines of a battle 
song.— November 13. And this man is, I learned today, 

' sixty-two years old. 



FRANZ KAFKA 


November 14. Tuesday. Yesterday at Max’s who re- 
turned from his Brunn lecture. 

In the afternoon while falling asleep. As thdugh the solid 
skullcap encircling the insensitive cranium had moved 
more deeply inward and left a part of the brain exposed to 
the free play of hght and muscles. 

To awaken on a cold autumn morning full of yellowish 
light. To force your way through the half-shut window 
and while still in front of the panes, before you fall, to 
hover, arms extended, belly arched, legs curved backward, 
like the figures on the bows of ships m old times. 

Before falling asleep. 

'^It seems so dreadful to be a bachelor, to become an old 
man struggling to keep one’s dignity while begging for an 
invitation whenever one wants to spend an evening m com- 
pany, having to car^ one’s meal home m one’s hand, un- 
able to expect anyone with a lazy sense of calm confidence, 
able only with difficulty and vexation to give a gift to 
someone, having to say good night at the front door, never 
being able to run up a stairway beside one’s wife, to he ill 
and have only the solace of the view from one’s vjindow 
when one can sit up, to have only side doors in one’s room 
leading into other people’s hving rooms, to feel estranged 
from one’s family, with whom one can keep on close terms 
only by marriage, first by the marriage of one’s parents, 
then, when the effect of that has worn off, by one’s own, 
having to admire other people’s children and not even 
being allowed to go on saying. “I have none myself,” 
never to feel oneself grow older since there is no family 
growing up around one, modeling oneself in appearance 



DIARIES I 9 I I I 5 I 

and behavioi! on one or two bachelors remembered from 
our youth. 

This IS all-true, but it is easy to make the error of unfold- 
ing future sufferings so far m front of one that one’s eye 
must pass beyond thehi and never again return, while in 
reality, both today and later, one will stand with a palpable 
body and a real head, a real forehead that is, for smiting on 
with one’s hand.®^ 

Now I’ll try a sketch for the introduction to “Richard 
and Samuel.” 

November 15. Yesterday evening, already with a sense 
of foreboding, pulled the cover off the bed, lay down and 
again became aware of all my abilities as though I were 
holding them in my hand, they tightened my chest, they 
set my head on fire, for a short while, to console myself for 
not getting up to work, I repeated. “That’s not healthy, 
that’s not healthy,” and with almost>visibIe purpose tried 
to draw sleep over my head. I kept thinking of a cap with 
a visor which, to protect myself, I pulled down hard over 
my forehead. How much did I lose yesterday, how the 
blood pounded in my tight head, capable of anytliing and 
restrained only by powers which are indispensable for my 
very hfe and are here being wasted. 

It is certain that everything I have conceived in advance, 
even when I was in a good mood, whether word for word 
or just casually, but in specific words, appears dry, wrong, 
inflexible, embarrassing to everybody around me, timid, 
but above all incomplete when I try to write it down at my 
desk, although I have forgotten nothing of the original con- 
ception. This is naturally related in large part to the fact 



FRANZ KAFKA 


IS* 

that I conceive something good away from paper only in 
a time of exaltation, a time more feared than longed for, 
much as I do long for it; but then the fulness is so great 
that I have to give up Blindly and arbitrarily I snatch hand- 
fuls out of the stream so that when 1 write it down calmly, 
my acquisition is nothing in comparison with the fulness m 
which it lived, is incapable of restoring this fulness, and 
thus is bad and disturbing because it tempts to no purpose. 

November i6. This noon, before falling asleep, but I did 
not fall asleep, the upper part of the body of a wax woman 
lay on top of me. Her face was bent back over mme, her 
left forearm pressed against my breast. 

No sleep for three nights, at the slightest effort to do any- 
thing my strength is immediately exhausted. 

From an old notebook- “Now, in the evening, after hav- 
ing studied since six o’clock in the morning, I noticed that 
my left hand had already for some time been sympathet- 
ically clasping my right hand by the fingers.” 

November i8. Yesterday in the factory. Rode bSck on 
the trolley, sat in a corner with legs stretched out, saw 
people outside, lights in stores, walls of viaducts through 
which we passed, backs and faces over and over again, a 
highway leading from the business street of the suburb with 
nothing human on it save people going home, the glaring 
electric lights of the railroad station burned into the dark- 
ness, the low, tapering chimneys of a gas works, a poster 
announcing the guest appearance of a singer, de Treville, 
that gropes its way along the walls as far as an alley near the 



^ DIARIES 1 ij I 1 IJJ 

cemeteries, ftoir w liere it then renimed \vi Jh me out of dhe 
cold of die Eeidi into the hi aKe Mnrmch of the citv. We 
accept foreign cides is a fict. the inhahironis live theic 
without penetnang our way of hie. iust as we cxmo t pei»- 
trate theirs, a coii'uarijon must be made, it cur.’c be helped, 
but oue is ell ire that it his no moral or even psp* 
chologicd value, in the end one can often even otnit ffie 
comparison because the dllterence in the conditions of life 
is so great rfiat it makes it jannecessar\*. 

The suburbs of our native cirv. however, are also fore^a 
to us. but in this case comparisons have value, a half-hootls 
walk can prove ir to us over and over again, here hve peojde 
pardy within our cirv'. partly on the miserable, dark edge 
of the an- that is furrowed like a great ditch, -although they 
all have an area of interest in common vnth us that is greeter 
than any other group of people outside the cin- For this 
reason I alwai's enter and leave the suburb with a weak, 
mixed feeling of anxien-. of abandonment, of sj-mpathy, of 
amosin% of conceit, of jov m traveling, of fortitude, and 
return with pleasure, seriousness and calm, especially from 
^rikov. 

November 19. Sunday. Dream In the theater. Perform- 
ance of Das Weite Land by Schmtzler, adapted by Utitz.** 
I sit all the way up front, think I am sitting m the first row 
until It finally appears that it is the second. The back of the 
row is turned toward the stage so that one can see the audi- 
torium comfortably, the stage only by turning. The author 
is somewhere nearby, I can’t hold back my poor opinion of 
the play which I seem to know from before, but add that 
the third act is supposed to be witty. With this “supposed 
to be,” however, I mean to say that if one is speaking of the 
good parts, I do not know the play and must rely on hear- 



FRANZ KAFKA 


154 

say; therefore I repeat this remark once mori;, not just for 
myself, but nevertheless it is disregarded by the others. 
There is a great crush around me. The audience seems to 
have come in its winter clothes, everyone fills his seat to 
overflowing. People beside me, behind me, whom I do not 
see, mterrupt me, point out new arrivals, mention their 
names, my attention is called especially to a married couple 
foremg their way along a row of seats, since the woman has 
a dark-yellow, mannish, long-nosed face and besides, as far 
as one can see in the crowd out of which her head towers, 
is wearing men’s clothes, near me, remarkably free, the 
actor Lowy, but very unhke the real one, is standing and 
making excited speeches m which the word “principium” 
is repeated, I keep expecting the words “tertium compara- 
tionis,” they do not come. In a box in the second tier, really 
only in a right-hand comer (seen from the stage) of the 
balcony that connects with the boxes there, a thurd son of 
the Kisch family,®^ dressed in a beautiful Prince Albert 
with its flaps opened^wide, stands behind his mother, who 
is seated, and speaks out into the theater Lowy’s speeches 
have a connection with these speeches. Among other 
things, Kisch pomts high up to a spot on the curtain and 
says, There sits the German Kisch, by this he means my 
schoolmate who studied Germanics. When the curta#n goes 
up the theater begins to darken, and Kisch, in order to indi- 
cate that he would disappear m any case, marches up and 
away from the balcony with his mother, again with all his 
arms, coats and legs spread wide. 

The stage is somewhat lower than the auditorium, you 
look down with your chin on the back of the seat. The set 
consists chiefly of two low, thick pillars in the middle of 
the stage. The scene is a banquet in which girls and young 
men take part. Despite the fact that when the play began 



' DIARIES I 9 I I 155 

many people in the first rows left, apparently to go back- 
stage, I can see very little, for the girls left behind block 
the view widi their large, flat hats, most of which are blue, 
that move back and f9rth along the whole length of the 
row. Nevertheless, I see a small ten- to fifteen-year-old boy 
unusually clearly on the stage. He has dry, parted, straight- 
cut hair. He cannot even place his napkin properly on his 
lap, must look down carefully when he does, and is sup- 
posed to be a man-about-tfbwn in this play In consequence^ 
I no longer have much confidence in this theater. The com- 
pany on the stage now waits for various newcomers who 
come down onto the stage from the first rows of the audi- 
torium. But the play is not well rehearsed, either. Thus, 
an actress named Hackelberg has just entered, an actor, 
leaning back in his chair like a man of the world, addresses 
her as “Hackel,” then becomes aware of his mistake and 
. corrects himself. Now a gurl enters whom I know (her 
name is Frankel, I think), she chmbs over the back of the 
seat right where I am sitting, her bac^, when she climbs 
over, IS entirely naked, the skin not very good, over £he 
right hip there is even a scratched, bloodshot spot the size 
of a doorknob But then, when she turns around on the 
stage and stands there with a clean face, she acts very well. 
Now a singing horseman is supposed to approach out of 
the distance at a gallop, a piano reproduces the clatter of 
hoofs, you hear the stormy song approaching, finally I see 
the singer too, who, to give the singing the natural swelling 
that takes place in a rapid approach, is running along the 
balcony up above toward the stage. He is not yet at the 
stage or through with the song and yet he has already 
passed the climax of haste and shrieking song, and the piano 
too can no longer reproduce distinctly the sound of hoofs 
striking against the stones. Both stop, therefore, and the 



FRANZ KAFKA 


singer approaches quietly, but he makes himself so small 
that only his head rises above the railing of the balcony, so 
that you cannot see him very clearly. 

With this, the first act is over, but the curtain doesn’t 
come down, the theater remains dark too. On the stage two 
critics sit on the floor, writing, with their backs resting 
against a piece of scenery. A dramatic coach or stage man- 
ager with a blond, pointed beard jumps onto the stage, 
while still in the air he stretches one hand out to give some 
instructions, in the other hand he has a bunch of grapes 
that had been m a fruit dish on the banquet table and 
which he now eats. 

Again facing the auditorium I see that it is lit by simple 
petroleum lanterns that are stuck up on simple chandeliers, 
like those in the streets, and now, of course, burn only very 
low. Suddenly, impure petroleum or a damaged wick is 
probably the cause, the hght spurts out of one of these ^ 
lanterns and sparks pour down in a broad gush on the 
crowded audience that forms a mass as black as earth. 
Then a gentleman rises up out of this mass, walks on it to- 
ward the lantern, apparently wants to fix the lantern, but 
first looks up at it, remains standing near it for a short 
while and, when nothing happens, returns quietly to his 
place in which he is swallowed up. I take him for myself 
and bow my face into the darkness. 

I and Max must really be different to the very core. Much 
as I admire his writings when they lie before me as a whole, 
resisting my and anyone else’s encroachment (a few small 
book reviews even today), still, every sentence he writes 
for “Richard and Samuel” is bound up with a reluctant con- 
cession on my part which I feel painfully to my very 
depths. At least today. 



) DIARIES I 9 I I 157 

This eveniilg I was again filled with anxidusly restrained 
abihties. 

November 20. Dream of a picture, apparently by Ingres. 
The girls in the woods in a thousand mirrors, or rather: 
the virgins, etc. To the right of the picture, grouped in the 
same way and airily drawn like the pictures on theater cur- 
tains, there was a more compact group, to the left they sat 
and lay on a gigantic twig or flying ribbon, or soared by 
their own power in a chain that rose slowly toward the sky. 
And now they were reflected not only toward the spec- 
tator but also away from him, became more indistinct and 
multitudinous, what the eye lost in detail it gained in ful- 
ness. But m front stood a naked girl untouched by the re- 
flections, her weight on one leg, her hip thrust forward. 
Here Ingres’ draftsmanship was to be admured, but I actu- 
ally found with satisfaction that there was too much real 
‘nakedness left in this girl even for the sense of touch. From 
behind her came a gleam of pale, yelldwish light. 

% 

My repugnance for antitheses is certain. They are unex- 
pected, but do not surprise, for they have always been 
there; if they were unconscious, it was at the very edge 
of consciousness. They make for thoroughness, fulness, 
completeness, but only like a figure on the “wheel of 
life”, SB have chased our little idea around the circle. 
They are as undifferentiated as they are different, they 
grow under one’s hand as though bloated by water, begin- 
ning with the prospect of infinity, they always end up in 
the same medium size. They curl up, cannot be straightened 
out, are mere clues, are holes in wood, are immobile as- 
saults, draw antitheses to themselves, as I have shown. If 
they would only draw all of them, and forever. 



FRANZ KAFKA 


IS8 

For the drama Weise, English teacher, the way he hur- 
ried by with squared shoulders, his hands deep in his 
pockets, his yellowish overcoat tightly folded, crossing the 
tracks with powerful strides right in front of the trolley 
that still stood there but was already signahng its departure 
with its bell. Away from us. 

e: Aima! 

X {looking up) . Yes. 

E: Come here. 

A {long, quiet steps ) . What do you want? 

E: I wanted to tell you that I have been dissatisfied with 
you for some time. 

A: Really! 
e: It is so. 

a: Then you must certainly give me notice, Emil. 
e: So quickly? And don’t you even ask the reason? 

A: I know It. 

e: You do? ' 

a: 'You don’t like the food. 

E {stands up quickly, loud): Do you or don’t you know 
that Kurt is leaving this evening? 

A {inwardly undisturbed) Why yes, unfortunately he is 
leaving, you didn’t have to call me here for that.' 

November 21. My former governess, the one with the 
black-and-yellow face, with the square nose and a wart on 
her cheek which used to delight me so, was at our house 
today for the second time recently to see me. The first time 
I wasn’t home, this time I wanted to be left in peace and to 
sleep and had them tell her I was out. Why did she bring 
me up so badly, after all I was obedient, she herself is saying 
so now to the cook and the governess in the anteroom, I 



1 DIARIES I9II 159 

was good and had a quiet disposition. Wh^ didn’t she use 
this to my advantage and prepare a better future for me? 
She is a martied woman or a widow, has children, has a 
lively way of speakin^f that doesn’t let me sleep, thinks I 
am a tall, healthy gentleman at the beautiful age of twenty- 
eight who likes to remember his youth and in general 
knows what to do with himself. Now, however, I he here 
on the sofa, kicked out of the world, on the lookout for the 
sleep that refuses to come? and will only graze me when it" 
does, my joints ache with fatigue, my dried-up body trem- 
bles toward its own destruction in turmoils of which I dare 
not become fully conscious, in my head are astonishing 
convulsions And there stand the three women before my 
door, one praises me as I was, two as I am. The cook says 
I shall go straight— she means without any detour— to 
heaven. Thus it shall be. 

k 

°Lowy: A rabbi in the Talmud mad^it a principle, in this 
case very pleasing to God, to accept nothing, not even a 
glass of water, from anyone. Now it happened, howeve?, 
that the greatest rabbi of his time wanted to make his ac- 
quaintance and therefore invited him to a meal. To refuse 
the invjfation of such a man, that was impossible. The first 
rabbi therefore set out sadly on his journey. But because 
his principle was so strong, a mountain raised itself up 
between the two rabbis. 

ANNA (sits at the table, reading the paper). 

KARL (walks around the room, when he comes to the win- 
dow he stops and looks out, once he even opens the irmer 
window). 

anna: Please leave the window closed, it’s really freezing. 



i6o 


FRANZ KAFKA 


EARL (closes the window): Well, we have d.fFerent things 
to worry about. 

(November 22 ) anna- No, but you have developed a new 
habit, Emil, one that’s quite horrible. You know how to 
catch hold of every trifle and use it to find something 
bad in me. 

KARL ( rubs his fingers ) . Because you have no consideration, 
because m general you are incomprehensible. 

It is certain that a major obstacle to my progress is m)f 
physical condition. Nothmg can be accomphshed with 
such a body. I shall have to get used to its perpetual balking. 
As a result of the last few nights spent in wild dreams but 
with scarcely a few snatches of sleep, I was so incoherent 
this morning, felt nothing but my forehead, saw a halfway 
bearable condition only far beyond my present one, and in 
sheer readiness to die would have been glad simply to have 
curled up in a ball on the cement floor of the corridor with' 
the documents in my hand My body is too long for its 
weakness, it hasn’t the least bit of fat to engender a blessed 
warmth, to preserve an inner fire, no fat on which the spirit 
could occasionally nourish itself beyond its daily need 
without damage to the whole How shall the weak heart 
that lately has troubled me so often be able to pound the 
blood through all the length of these legs It would be labor 
enough to the knees, and from there it can only spill with a 
senile strength into the cold lower parts of my legs. But 
now It is already needed up above again, it is being waited 
for, while it is wasting itself down below. Everything is 
pulled apart throughout the length of my body. What 
could It accomplish then, when it perhaps wouldn’t have 
enough strength for what I want to achieve even if it were 
shorter and more compact. 



DIARIES I 9 I I l6l 

From a letfex of Lowy’s to his father; When I come to 
Warsaw I will walk about among you in my European 
clothes like “a spider before your eyes, lilte a mourner at a 
wedding.” 

Lowy tells a story about a married friend who lives in 
Postin, a small town near Warsaw, and who feels isolated 
in his progressive interests and therefore unhappy. 

“Postin, is that a large sity^” " 

“This large,” he holds out the palm of his hand to me. It 
IS covered by a rough yellow-brown glove and looks like 
a wasteland. 

November 23. On the 2ist, the hundredth anniversary 
of Kleist’s death, the Kleist family had a wreath placed on 
his grave with the epitaph “To the best of their house.” 

, On what circumstances my way of life makes me de- 
pendent' Tonight I slept somewhat bfetter than in the past 
week, this afternoon even fairly well, I even feel ti\^t 
drowsiness which follows moderately good sleep, conse- 
quently I am afraid I shall not be able to write as well, feel 
individual abilities turning more deeply inward and am 
prepared for any surprise, that is, I already see it. 

November 24. Shechite (one who is learning the slaugh- 
terer’s art). Play by Gordin. In it quotations from the 
Talmud, for example: 

If a great scholar commits a sin during the evening or the 
night, by morning you are no longer permitted to reproach 
him with it, for in his scholarship he has already repented 
of it himself. , 

If you steal an ox then you must return two, if you 



FRANZ KAFKA 


162 

slaughter the stolen ox then you must retuiti four, but if 
you slaughter a stolen calf then you must return only three 
because it is assumed that you had to carry the calf away, 
therefore had done hard work. This assumption influences 
the pumshment even if the calf was led away without any 
difficulty. 

Honesty of evil thoughts. Yesterday evening I felt espe- 
cially miserable. My stomach was upset again. 1 had written 
with difficulty. I had listened with effort to Lowy’s reading 
in the coffeehouse (which at first was quiet so that we had 
to restrain ourselves, but which then became full of bustle 
and gave us no peace), the dismal future immediately be- 
fore me seemed not worth entering, abandoned, I walked 
through Ferdinandstrasse. Then at the junction with the 
Bergstein I once more thought about the more distant fu- 
ture. How would I hve through it with this body picked 
up in a lumber room’ The Talmud too says. A man with-' 
out a woman is no person. I had no defense this evening 
against such thoughts except to say to myself: “It is now 
that you come, evil thoughts, now, because I am weak and 
have an upset stomach. You pick this nme for me to thmk 
you. You have waited for your advantage. Shame on you. 
Come some other time, when I am stronger. Don’t ‘exploit 
my condition in this way.” And, in fact, without even 
waiting for other proofs, they yielded, scattered slowly 
and did not again disturb me during the rest of my walk, 
which was, naturally, not too happy. They apparently for- 
got, however, that if they were to respect all my evil 
momehts, they would seldom get their chance. 

'The odor of gasoline from an automobile driving toward 
me from the theater made me notice how visibly a beautiful 



, DIARIES 1911 163 

home hfe (ar <1 were it lit only by a smgle candle, that is all 
one needs before gomg to bed) is waiang for the theater- 
goers comir^ toward me who are givmg their cloaks and 
dangling opera glasses a last tug into place, but also how it 
seems that they are bdng sent home from the theater like 
subordinates before whom the curtain has gone down for 
the last time and behind whom the doors have opened 
through which— full of pride because of some ridiculous 
worry or another— they ^ad entered the theater before the 
begmning of or during the first act. 

November 28. Have written nothing for three days. 

Spent all afternoon of the 25th in the Cafe City persuad- 
ing M. to sign a declaration that he was just a clerk with us, 
therefore not covered by insurance, so that Father would 
not be obhged to make the large payment on his insurance. 
He promises it, I speak fluent Czech, I apologize for my 
‘ mistakes with particular elegance, he promises to send the 
declaration to the office Monday, I feel that if he does not 
like me then at least he respects me, but on Monday he sonds 
nothing, nor is he any longer in Prague, he has left. ^ 

Dull evemng at Baum’s without Max. Reading of Die 
Hassltche, a story that is still too disorgamzed, the first 
■chapter is rather the building site of a story. 

On Sunday, November 26th, “Richard and Samuel” with 
Max morning and afternoon until five. Then to N , a collec- 
tor from Linz, recommended by Kubin, fifty, gigantic, 
towerlike movements, when he is silent for any length of 
time one bows one’s head, for he is entirely silent, while 
when he speaks he does not speak entirely, his hfe consists 
of collecting and fofmeating. 

Collecting: He began with a collection of postage stamps, 
then turned to drawings, then collected everything, then 



164 FRANZ KAFKA 

saw the aimlessness of this collection which cpuld never be 
completed and limited himself to amulets, later to pilgrim- 
age medals and pilgrimage tracts from lower. Austria and 
southern Bavaria These are medals and tracts which are 
issued anew for each pilgrmiage, most of them worthless m 
their material and also artistically, but often have mce pic- 
tures. He now also began industriously to write about them, 
and indeed was the first to write on this subject, for the 
systematization of which he first estabhshed the points of 
reference Naturally, those who had been collecting these 
objects and had put off publishing were furious, but had to 
put up with It nevertheless. Now he is an acknowledged ex- 
pert on these pilgrimage medals, requests come from all 
over for his opinion and decision on these medals, his voice 
is decisive Besides, he collects everything else as well, his 
pride IS a chastity belt that, together with his amulets, was 
exhibited at the Dresden Hygiemc Exhibition. (He has )ust 
been there to have everj'thing packed for shipment ) Then ' 
a beautiful knight’s sword of the Falkenstemers. His rela- 
tioijship to art is unambiguous and clear in that bad way 
wiiich collecting makes possible. 

From the coffeehouse in the Hotel Graf he takes us up 
to his overheated room, sits down on the bed, we on two 
chairs around him, so that we form a quiet group His first 
question “Are you collectors^’” 

“No, only poor amateurs ” 

“That doesn’t matter.” He pulls out his wallet and prac- 
tically showers us with bookplates, his own and others’, 
jumbled with announcements of his next book, “Magic and 
Superstition in the Mineral Kingdom ” He has already writ- 
ten much, especially on “Motherhood m Art,” he considers 
the pregnant body the most beautiful, for him it is also the 
most pleasant to f . He has also written about amulets. 



, DIARIES 1911 165 

He was also jn the employ of the Vienna Court Museum, 
was m charge of excavations m Brada at the mouth of the 
Danube, invented a process, named after him, for restoring 
excavated vases, is a member of thirteen learned societies 
and museums, his collection is willed to the Germanic 
Museum in Nuremberg, he often sits at his desk until one 
or two o’clock at night and is back at eight o’clock m the 
morning. We have to write something in a lady friend’s 
album which he has brought along to fill up on his journey. 
Those who themselves create come first. Max writes a com- 
plicated verse which Mr. N. tries to render by the proverb, 
“Every cloud has a silver lining.’’ Before this, he had read 
it aloud in a wooden voice. I write down- 

Little soul, 

Soundest m dancing, etc. 

He reads aloud again, I help, finally he says- “A Persian 
. rhythm^ Now what is that called? Ghazel? Right.” We are 
Yiot in a position to agree with this nor even to guess at what 
he means. Finally he quotes a “ntomello by Ruckert.” Yes, 
he meant ritomello. However, it is not that either. 
well, but it has a certain melody. 

He is a friend of Halbe He hkes to talk about him. We 
.woulf^ much rather talk about Blei. There is not much to 
say about him, however, Munich literary society does not 
think much of him because of his mtellectual doublecross- 
ing, he IS divorced from his wife who had had a large prac- 
tice as a dentist and supported him, his daughter, sixteen, 
.blond, with blue eyes, is the wildest girl in Munich. In 
Sternheim’s Hwe-N. was at the theater with Halbe-Blei 
played an aging mJn-about-town. When N. met him the 
next day he said: “Herr Doktor, yesterday you played Dr. 
Biel” 



i66 


FRANZ KAFKA 


“What^ Wbat!^” he said m embarrassment, “but I was 
playing so-and-so.” 

When we leave he throws open the bed so that it may 
thoroughly take on the warmth of the room, he arranges 
for additional heaung besides. 

'November 29. From the Talmud. When a scholar goes 
to meet his bride, he should take an am ha-aretz along, 
he is too deeply sunk in his scholarliness, he would not ob- 
serve hat should be observed 

As a result of bribery the telephone and telegraph wires 
around Warsaw were put up in a complete circle, which in 
the sense of the Talmud makes the citv a bounded area, 
a courtyard, as it were, so that on Saturday it is possible 
even for the most pious person to move about, carry trifles 
(like handkerchiefs) on his person, within this circle. 

The parties of the Hasidim where they merrily discourse 
on talmudic problems If the entertainment runs down or 
if someone docs not take part, they make up for it by sing- 
ing.. Melodies are invented, if one is a success, members of 
the family are called in and it is repeated and rehearsed with 
them. At one such entertainment a wonder-rabbi \i ho often 
had hallucinations suddenly laid his face on his arms, which 
were resting on the table, and remained in that position for 
three hours while everyone was silent. When he awoke he 
wept and sang an entirely new, gay, military march. This 
was the melody with which the angels of the dead had just 
escorted to heaven the soul of a wonder-rabbi who had died 
at this time in a far-off Russian city. 

On Friday, according to the Kabbalah, the pious get a 
new, more delicate soul, entirely divine, which re mains 
with them until Saturday evening. 

On Friday evening two angels accompany each pious 



j DIARIES 19 I I I^ 

man from th? synagogue to his home, tho master of the 
house stands while he greets them in the dining room; they 
stay only a short time. 

'■ The education of gii?ls, their growing up, getting used to 
the ways of the world, was always especially important 
to me. Then they no longer run so hopelessly out of tKe 
way of a person who knows them only casually and would 
like to speak casually with them, they have begun to stop 
for a moment, even though it be not quite in that part of 
the room in which you would have them, you need no 
longer hold them with glances, threats or the power of love; 
when they turn away they do so slowly and do not intend 
any harm by it, then their backs have become broader too. 
What you say to them is not lost, they listen to the whole 
question without your having to hurry, and they answer, 
jokingly to be sure, but directly to the point. Yes, with 
•their faces lifted up they even ask questions themselves, 
and a short conversation is not more’than they can stand. 
They hardly ever let a spectator disturb them any mora^ 
the work they have just undertaken, and therefore pay less 
attention to him, yet he may look at them longer. They 
withdraw only to dress for dinnen/This is the only time 
when you may be insecure. Aside from this, however, you 
need no longer run through the streets, lie in wait at house 
doors, and wait over and over again for a lucky chance, 
even though you have really long since learned that such 
chances can’t be forced. 

. But despite this great change that has taken place in them 
it is no rarity for them to come toward us with mournful 
faces when we meet them unexpectedly, to put their hands 
flady in ours and with slow gestures invite us to enter their 
homes as though we were business acquaintances. They 



i68 


FRANZ KAFKA 


walk heavily up and down in the next room, .but when we 
penetrate there too, in desire and spite, they crouch in a 
window seat and read the paper without a glance to spare 
for us. 

December 3. I have now read a part of Schafer’s Karl 
Stauffers Lebensgang. Eine Chronik der Letdenschaft, and 
am so caught up and held fast by this powerful impression 
f orcmg Its way mto that mner part of me which I listen to 
and learn from only at rare intervals, but at the same time 
am driven to such a pass by the hunger imposed on me by 
my upset stomach and by the usual excitements of the free 
Sunday, that I must write, just as one can get relief from 
external excitement forced upon one from the outside only 
by flailing one’s arms. 

The unhappiness of the bachelor, whether seeming or 
actual, IS so easily guessed at by the world around hun that 
he will curse his decision, at least if he has remained a bache- 
lor because of the delight he takes in secrecy. He walks 
around with his coat buttoned, his hands in the upper 
pockets of his jacket, his arms akimbo, his hat pulled down 
over his eyes, a false smile that has become natural to him 
is supposed to shield his mouth as his glasses do his ayes, hjs 
trousers are tighter than seem proper for his thin legs. But 
everyone knows his condition, can detail his sufferings. A 
cold breeze breathes upon him from within and he gazes 
inward with the even sadder half of his double face. He 
moves incessantly, but with predictable regularity, from 
one apartment to another. The farther he moves away from 
the living, for whom he must still— and this is the worst 
mockery— work like a conscious slave who dare not express 
his consciousness, so much the smaller a space is considered 



, DIARIES I 9 I I 169 

sufficient for Jiim. While it is death that must still strike 
down the others, though they may have spent all their lives 
in a sickbed-ifor even though they would have gone down 
by themselves long ago from their own weakness, they 
nevertheless hold fast to their loving, very healthy relatives 
by blood and marriage— he, this bachelor, still in the midst 
of life, apparently of his own free will resigns himself to an 
ever smaller space, and when he dies the coffin is exactly 
right for him. 

My recent reading of Morike’s autobiography to my 
sisters began well enough but improved as I went on, and 
finally, my fingertips together, it conquered inner obstacles 
with my voice’s unceasing calm, provided a constantly ex- 
panding panorama for my voice, and finally the whole 
room round about me dared admit nothing but my voice. 
Until my parents, returning from business, rang. 

Before falling asleep felt on my bo^y the weight of the 
fists on my light arms 

December 8 Friday, have not written for a long time, 
but this time it was really m part because of satisfaction, as 
I have finished the first chapter of “Richard and Samuel” 
and consider it, particularly the original description of the 
sleep in the train .compartment, a success. Even more, I 
think that something is happemng within me that is very 
close to Schiller’s transformation of emotion into character. 
Despite all the resistance of my inner being I must write 
this down. 

Walk with Lowy to the Lieutenant-Governor’s castle, 
which I called Fort Zion. The entrance gates and the color 
of the sky matched very well. 



FRANZ KAFKA 


170 

Another walk to Hetz Island. Story about Mrs. Tschis- 
sik, how they took her into the company in Berlin out of 
pity, at first an insignificant singer of duets in an antiquated 
dress and hat. Reading of a letter from Warsaw in which a 
young Warsaw Jew complains about the dechne of the 
Jewish theater and writes that he prefers to go to the “No- 
wosti,” the Polish operetta theater, rather than to the Jew- 
ish one, for the miserable eqiupment, the indecencies, the 
*‘moldy” couplets, etc., are unbearable. Just imagine the big 
scene of a Jewish operetta in which the prima donna, with 
a train of small children behind her, marches through the 
audience onto the stage. Each of them is carrying a small 
scroll of the Torah and is smging: T oire tz dt beste s'khotre 
—the Torah is the best merchandise. 

Beautiful lonely walk over the Hradschin and the Belve- 
dere after those successful parts of “Richard and Samuel.” 
In the Nerudagasse a sign Anna Kfizova, Dressmake.', 
Trained in France By the Aid of the Dowager Duchess 
^irenberg, nVe Princess Ahrenberg.— In the middle of the 
first castle court I stood and watched the calling out of the 
castle guard. . 

The last section I wrote hasn’t pleased Max, piobably 
because he regards it as unsuitable for the whole, but pos- 
sibly also because he considers it bad in itself. This is very 
probable because he warned me against writing such long 
passages and regards the effect of such writmg as somewhat 
jellylike. 

In order to be able to speak to young girls I need older 
persons near me. The slight disturbance emanating from 
them enlivens my speech, I immediately feel that the de- 



jdiaries 191 1 171 

mands made on me are diminished; what -I speak out of 
myself without previous consideration can always, if it is 
not suitable for the gurl, be dnected to the older person, 
from whom I can also, if it becomes necessary, draw an 
abundance of help. 

Miss H. She reminds me of Mrs. Bl., only her long, 
slightly double-curved and relatively narrow nose loo^ 
like the ruined nose of Mrs. BI. But aside from that there isf 
also m her face a blackness, hardly caused externally, that 
can be driven into the skm only by a strong character. 
Broad back, well on the way to being a woman’s swelling 
back, heavy body that seems thin in the well-cut jacket and 
on which the narrow jacket is even loose. She raises her 
head freely to show that she has found a way out of the 
embarrassing moments of the conversation. Indeed, I was 
not put down in this conversation, had not surrendered 
iyen inwardly, but had I just looked at myself from the 
outside, I should not have been able to* explain my behavior 
in any other way. In the past I could not express my»^ 
freely in the company of new acquaintances because the 
presence of sexual wishes unconsciously hindered me, now 
their conscious absence hinders me. 

> d 

Ran into the Tschissik couple at the Graben. She was 
wearing the hussy’s dress she wore in Der Wilde Mensch. 
When I break down her appearance into its details as I saw 
it then at the Graben, she becomes improbable. (I saw her 
only for a moment, for I became frightened at the sight of 
her, did not greet her, nor did she see me and I did not 
immediately dare to turn around.) She seemed much 
smaller than usual, her left hip was thrust forward, not just 
at the moment, but permanently, her right leg was bent in 



172 FRANZ KAFKA 

at the knee, tho movements of her throat and head, which 
she brought close to her husband, were very quick, with 
her right arm crooked outward she tried to take the arm 
of her husband. He was wearing his httle summer hat with 
the brim turned down in front When I turned they were 
gone. I guessed that they had gone to the Cafe Central, 
waited awhile on the other side of the Graben and was 
lucky enough after a long interval to see her come to the 
window. When she sat down atthe table only the rim of 
her cardboard hat, covered with blue velvet, was visible. 

I then dreamed that I was in a very narrow but not very 
tall glass-domed house with two entrances like the impass- 
able passageways in the paintings of Italian primitives, also 
resembling from the distance an arcade leading off from 
the Rue des Petits Champs that we saw in Paris. Except 
that the one in Paris was really wider and full of stores, but 
this one ran along between blank walls, appeared to have 
scarcely enough room for two people to walk side by sid', 
but when one really entered it, as I did with Mrs. Tschissik, 
tb^re was a surprising amount of room, which did not 
really surprise us. While I left by one exit with Mrs. Tschis- 
sik in the direction of a possible observer of all this, and 
Adrs. Tschissik at the same time apologized for some offense 
or other (it seemed to be drunkenness) and begged me not 
to .believe her detractors, Mr. Tschissik, at the second of 
the house’s two exits, whipped a shaggy, blond St Bernard 
which stood opposite him on its hind legs It was not quite 
clear whether he was just playing with the dog and neg- 
lected his wife because of it, or whether he had himsdf 
been attacked by the dog in earnest, or whether he wished 
to keep the dog away from us. 


With L. on the quay. I had a slight spell of faintness that 



DIARIES 1911 ^3 

Stifled all my ^eing, got over it and remembered it after a 
short time as something long forgotten. 

c 

Even if I overlook all other obstacles (physical condi- 
tion, parents, character), the following serves as a very 
good excuse for my not limiung myself to literature in 
spite of everything I can take nothmg on myself as long 
as I have not achieved a sustained work that satisfies me 
completely. That is of course irrefutable. 

I have now, and have had since this afternoon, a great 
yearning to write all my anxiety entirely out of me, write 
it mto the depths of the paper just as it comes out of the 
depths of me, or write it doM n in such a way that I could 
draw what I had written mto me completely. This is no 
artistic yearmng. Today, when Ldwy spoke of his dissatis- 
facuon with and of his indifference to everythmg that the 
Cjoupe does, I explained his condition as due to homesick- 
ness, but in a sense did not give him this explanation even 
though I voiced it, instead kept it for myself and en]o3^d 
it in passing as a sorrow of my own. 

December 9. Stauffer-Bem “ The sweemess of creation 
begets Illusi ons ab out its real value.” 

) 

If one patiently submits to a book of letters or memoirs, 
no matter by whom, in this case it is Karl Stauffer-Bem, 
one doesn’t make him one’s own by mam strength, for to 
do this one has to employ art, and art is its own reward; but 
rather one suffers oneself to be drawn away— this is easily 
done, if one doesn’t resist— by the concentrated otherness 
of the person writing and lets oneself be made into his 
counterpart. Thus it is no longer remarkable, when one is 



FRAMZ KAFKA 


174 

brought back eo one’s self by the closing of the book, that 
one feels the better for this excursion and this recreat on, 
and, with a clearer head, remains behmd m one’s own 
being, which has been newly discovered, newly shaken up 
and seen for a moment from the distance. Only later are 
we surprised that these expenences of another person’s life, 
in spite of their vividness, are faithfully described m the 
book— our own experience mchnes us to think that nothing 
in the world is further removed from an experience (sor- 
row over the death of a friend, for instance) than its de- 
scription. But what IS right for us is not right for the other 
person. If our letters cannot match our own feelings— 
naturally, there are varymg degrees of this, passing imper- 
ceptibly mto one another m both directions— if even at our 
best, expressions like “indescribable,” “mexpressible,” or 
“so sad,” or “so beautiful,” followed by a rapidly collaps- 
ing “that”-clause, must perpetually come to our assistance, 
then as if in compensation we have been given the abiht^ 
to comprehend what another person has written with at 
lejest the same degree of calm exactitude which we lack 
when we confront our own letter-writing. Our ignorance 
of those feelings which alternately make us crumple up 
and pull open again the letter in front of us, this very ig- 
norance becomes knowledge the moment we a..e com- 
pelled to limit ourselves to this letter, to believe only what 
it says, and thus to find it perfectly expressed and perfect 
in expression, as is only right, if we are to see a clear road 
into what is most human. So Karl Stauffer’s letters contain 
only an account of the short life of an artist — * 

December 10. Sunday. I must go to see my sister and her 
little boy. When my mother came home from my sister’s 
at one o’clock at mght the day before yesterday with the 



j DIARIES I9II 175 

news of thc^ boy’s birth, my father mrorched through 
thttiiouse m his mghtshirt, opened all the doors, woke me, 
the maid and my sisters and proclaimed the birth as though 
the child had not only been bom, but as though it had al- 
ready hved an honorable life and been buried too. 

December 13. Because of fatigue did not write and lay 
now on the sofa in the warm room and now on the one in 
the cold room, with sick l^gs and disgusting dreams. A dog 
lay on my body, one paw near my face. I woke up because 
of it but was still afraid for a little while to open my eyes 
and look at it. 

Biberpelz. Bad play, flowing along without climax. 
Scenes with the police superintendent not true. Delicate 
acting by the Lehmann woman of the Lessing Theater. 
The way her skirt folds between her thighs when she 
Spends. The thoughtful look of the people when she raises 
her two hands, places them one undel: the other on the left 
in front of her face, as though she wanted to weaken ><ihe 
force of the denying or protesting voice. Bewildered, 
coarse acting of the others. The comedian’s impudence to- 
ward the play (draws his saber, exchanges hats). My cold 
aversion. Went home, but whde still there sat with a feel- 
ing of admiration that so many people take upon them- 
selves so much excitement for an evening (they shout, 
steal, are robbed, harass, slander, neglect), and that in this 
play, if one only looks at it with blinking eyes, so many 
(^sordered human voices and exclamations are thrown to- 
gether. Pretty girls One with a flat face, unbroken sur- 
faces of skin, rounded cheeks, hair beginning high up, eyes 
lost in this smoothness and protruding a little.— Beautiful 
passages of the play in which the Wulffen woman shows 



FRANZ KAFKA 


176 

hetself at oiice,a thief and an honest friend of the clever, 
progressive, democratic people. A Wehrhahn in the audi- 
ence might feel himself justified.— Sad parallelism of the 
four acts. In the first act there is stealing, in the second act 
is the judgment, the same m the thud and fourth acts. 

‘ Der Schneider als Gemeinderat at the Jews. Without the 
Tschissiks but with two new, terrible people, the Liebgold 
couple. Bad play by Richter. The beginning hke Moliere, 
the purse-proud alderman hung with watches. The Lieb- 
gold woman can’t read, her husband has to rehearse with 
her. 

It IS almost a custom for a comedian to marry a serious 
actress and a serious actor a comedienne, and in general to 
take along with them only married women or relatives. 
The way once, at midnight, the piano player, probably a 
bachelor, shpped out the door with his music 

■r 

Brahms concert by the Singing Society. The essence of 
mj*’ unmusicalness consists in my inability to enjoy music 
connectedly, it only now and then has an effect on me, and 
how seldom it is a musical one. The natural effect of music 
on me is to circumscribe me with a wall, and its only con- 
stant mfluence on me is that, confined in this wpy, I am 
different from what I am when free. 

There is, among the public, no such reverence for litera- 
ture as there is for music. The singing girls. It was only the 
melody that held open the mouths of many of them. The 
throat and head of one with a clumsy body quivered when 
she sang. 

Three clerics in a box. The middle one, wearing a red 
skullcap, listens with calm and dignity, unmoved and 
heavy, but not stiff; the one on the right is sunken into 



I DIARIES I 9 I I 177 

himselfj with, a pointed, rigid, wrinkled face; the one on 
the left, stout, holds his face propped at an angle on his 
half-opened'fist. 

Played: Tragic Overture. (I hear only slow, solemn 
beats, now here, now there. It is instructive to watch the 
music pass from one group of players to another and to 
follow it with the ear. The disheveled hair of the conduc- 
tor.) “Beherzigung” by Goethe, “Nanie” by Schiller, 
“Gesang der Parzen,” “Triumphlied.” 

The singing women who stood up on the low balustrade 
as though on a piece of early Itahan architecture. 

Despite the fact that for a considerable time I have been 
standmg deep in literature and it has often broken over me, 
it is certain that for the past three days, aside from a gen- 
eral desire to be happy, I have felt no genuine desure for 
literature. In the same way I considered Lowy my inr 
dispensable friend last week, and now I have easily dis- 
pensed with him for three days. 

When I begin to write after a rather long interval, I 
draw the words as if out of the empty air. If I capture one, 
then I have just this one alone and all the toil must begin 
knew. ’ 

9 

December 14. My father reproached me at noon because 
I don’t bother with the factory. I explained that I had ac- 
cepted a share because I expected profit but that I cannot 
tkke an active part so long as I am in the office Father quar- 
reled on, I stood silently at the window. This evening, 
however, I caught myself thmking, as a result of that noon- 
time discussion, that I could put up with my present situ- 
ation very contentedly, and that I only had to be careful 



FBAXZ KAFKA 


*78 

not to have allmj' time free for literature. I had scarcely 
exposed this thought to a closer inspection v, hen it became 
no longer astonishing and already appeared accustomed. I 
disputed my ability to devote all my rime to literature. 
This conviction arose, of course, only from the momen- 
axy situation, but svas stronger than it I also thought of 
Wax as of a stranger despite the fact that today he has an 
exciting evening of reading and acting in BcrLn, it occurs 
to me now that I thought of him onlv when I approached 
Miss Taussig’s house on my evemng walk. 

Walk with Lowy down by the nver. The one pillar of 
the vault rising out of the Elizabeth Bridge, lit on the m- 
side by an electric light, looked— a dark mass between light 
streaming from the sides— like a factory chimney, and the 
dark wedge of shadow stretching over it to the sks’ was 
like ascending smoke. The sharply outlmed green areas of 
light at the side of the bridge. 

A 

The way, during the reading of Beethoven und das Lie- 
bespaar by W. Schafer, various thoughts (about dinner, 
about Lbwy, who v, as waiting) unconnected with what I 
was readmg passed through my mind ith great distracts 
ness without disturbing my reading, which just today was 
very pure. 

December i6. Sunday, 12 noon. Idled away the morning 
with sleepmg and readmg newspapers. Afraid to finish “a 
review for the Prager Tagblatt. Such fear of writing al- 
ways expresses itself by my occasionally makin g up, away 
from my desk, initial sentences for what I am to write 
which immediately prove unusable, dry, broken off long 



, DIABIES I 9 J I 179 

before their 'pnd and pointing with their towering frag- 
ments to a sad future. 

The old tricks at the Christmas Fair. Two cockatoos on 
a crossbar pull fortune^. Mistakes, a girl has a ladylove pre- 
dicted. A man offers artificial flowers for sale m rhyme: To 
jest raze udelend z kuze [This is a rose, made of leather]. 

Young Pipes when sinking. As sole gesture, he rolls his 
right forearm back and forth at the joint, he opens his 
hands a little and then draws them together again. Sweat 
covers his face, especially his upper bp, as though with 
sphnters of glass. A buttonless dickey has been hurriedly 
tucked into the vest under his straight black coat. 

The warm shadow m the soft red of Mrs. King’s mouth 
when she sings. 

Jewish streets in Pans, Rue Rosier, sidestreet of Rue de 
Rivoli. * 

If a disorgaruzed education having only that mimnJum 
coherence indispensable for the merest uncertam existence 
is suddenly challenged to a task limited in time, therefore 
necessarily arduous, to self-development, to articulate 
speech, *then the response can only be a bitterness in which 
are mingled arrogance over achievements which could be 
attained only by calling upon all one’s untrained powers, a 
last glance at the knowledge that escapes in surprise and 
that IS so very fluctuating because it was suspected rather 
than certain, and, finally, hate and admiration for the 
environment. 

Before falling asleep yesterday I had an image of a draw- 
ing in which a group of people were isolated like a moun- 



l8o FRANZ KAFKA 

fain in the air. The technique of the drawing seemed to me 
completely new and, once discovered, easily executed. 

A company was assembled around a table, the earth ex- 
tended somewhat beyond the circle of people, but of all 
these people, at the moment, I saw with a powerful glance 
only one young man m ancient dress. His left arm was 
propped on the table, the hand hung loosely over his face, 
which was playfully turned up toward someone who was 
solicitously or questionmgly bent over him. His body, es- 
pecially the right leg, was stretched out in careless youth- 
fulness, he lay rather than sat. The two distinct pairs of 
lines that outlined his legs crossed and softly merged with 
the Imes outlining his body. His pale, colored clothes lay 
heaped up between these Imes with feeble corporeality. In 
astonishment at this beautiful drawing, which begot m my 
head an excitement that I was convinced was that same and 
indeed permanent excitement which would guide the pen- 
al in my hand when I wished, I forced myself out of my 
twilight condition in order better to be able to think the 
drawing through. Then it soon turned out, of course, that 
I had imagined nothing but a small, gray-white porcelain 
group. 

In periods of transition such as the past week has been 
for me and as this moment at least still is, a sad but calm 
astonishment at my lack of feehng often grips me. I am di- 
vided from all things by a hollow space and I don’t even 
push myself to the limits of it. 

* 

Now, in the evening, when my thoughts begin to move 
more freely and I would perhaps be capable of something, 
I must go to the National Theater to the first night of Hip- 
podamie by Vrchlicky. 



^ DIARIES I 9 I I l8l 

It is qertain that Sunday can never be of jnore use to me 
than a weekday because its special organization throws all 
my habits into confusion and I need the additional free 
time to adjust myself halfway to this special day. 

The moment I were set free from the office I would 
yield at once to my desire to write an autobiography. I 
would have to have some such decisive change before me 
as a preliminary goal when I began to write in order to be 
able to give direction to the mass of events. But I cannot 
imagine any other inspiriung change than this, which is it- 
self so terribly improbable. Then, however, the writing of 
the autobiography would be a great joy because it would 
move along as easily as the writing down of dreams, yet it 
would have an entirely different effect, a great one, which 
would always influence me and would be accessible as well 
to the understanding and feeling of everyone else. 

December 1 8 . Day before yesterday Htppodamte. Bad 
play. A rambling about in Greek mythology without 
rhyme or reason Kvapil’s e^ay in the program which ex- 
presses between the lines the view apparent throughout 
J;he wl\ple performance, that a good production (which 
here, however, was nothing but an imitation of Reinhardt) 
can make a bad play into a great theatrical work. All this 
must be sad for a Czech who knows even a little of the 
world. 

4 The Lieutenant-Governor, who during the intermission 
snatched air from the corridor through the open door of 
his box. 

The appearance of the dead Axiocha, called up in the 
shape of a phantom, who soon disappears because, having 



t 82 


FRANZ KAFKA 


died only a short time ago, she relives her old hun;iati sor- 
rows too keenly at the sight of the world. 

I hate Werfel, not because I envy him, but I envy him 
too. He IS healthy, young and rich, everything that I am 
not. Besides, gifted with a sense of music, he has done very 
good work early and easily, he has the happiest life behind 
him and before him, I work with weights I cannot get rid 
of, and I am entirely shut off from music. 

I am not punctual because I do not feel the pains of wait- 
ing. I wait like an ox For if I feel a purpose m my mo- 
mentary existence, even a very uncertam one, I am so vain 
in my weakness that I would gladly bear anything for the 
sake of this purpose once it is before me. If I were m love, 
what couldn’t I do then. How long I waited, years ago, 
under the arcades of the Ring until Al. came by, even to see 
her walk by m ith her lover. I have been late for appomt- 
ments partly out of ca'telessness, partly out of ignorance of 
the pains of waiting, but also partly in order to attain new, 
complicated purposes through a renewed, uncertam search 
for the people with whom I had made the appomtments, 
and so to achieve the possibility of long, uncertam waiting. 
From the fact that as a child I had a great nervoussfear of 
waiting one could conclude that I was destmed for some- 
thing better and that I foresaw my future. 

My good periods do not have time or opportunity to 
live themselves out naturally; my bad ones, on the other 
hand, have more than they need. As I see from the diary, I 
have now been suffering from such a state since the 9th, 
for almost ten days. Yesterday I once again went to bed 
with my head on fire, and was ready to rejoice that the 



DIARIES 1911 1S3 

bad time was over and ready to fear that,I would deep 
badly. It passed, however, I dept fairly well and feel badly 
when I’m awake. 

December 19 YesteiHay Davids Geige by Lateiner. The 
disinherited son, a good viohnist, returns home a rich man, 
as I used to dream of doing m my early days at the Gym- 
nasium But first, disguised as a beggar, his feet bound in 
rates like a snow-shoveller, he tests his relatives who have, 
never left home his poor, honest daughter, his rich brother 
who will not give his son in marriage to his poor cousin and 
who despite his age himself wants to marry a young wom- 
an. He reveals himself later on by tearing open a Prince 
Albert under which, on a diagonal sash, hang decorations 
from all the princes of Europe By viohn playing and dng- 
mg he turns all the relatives and their hangers-on into good 
people and straightens out their affairs. 

Mrs Tschissik acted agam Yesterday her body was 
more beautiful than her face, which seemed narrower than 
usual so that the forehead, which is thrown into wrin- 
kles at her first "word, was too striking The beautifully 
rounded, moderately strong, large body did not belong 
with her face yesterday, and she reminded me vaguely of 
hybrid bemgs hke mermaids, sirens, centaurs When she 
stood before me then, with her face distorted, her com- 
plexion spoiled by make-up, a stain on her dark-blue 
short-sleeved blouse, I felt as though I were speaking to a 
statue m a circle of pitiless onlookers. 

Mrs. Klug stood near her and watched me Miss Weltsch 
watched me from the left. I said as many stupid things as 
possible. I did not stop askmg Mrs. Tschissik why she 
had gone to Dresden, although I knew that she had quar- 



FRANZ KAFKA 


184 

reled with the< others and for that reason had gone away, 
and that this subject was embarrassing to her. In the end 
It was even more embarrassing to me, but -nothing else 
occurred to me. When Mrs. Tschissik joined us while 
I was speaking to Mrs. Klug, I turned to Mrs. Tschissik, 
saymg “Pardon!” to Mrs. Klug as though I intended to 
spend the rest of my hfe with Mrs. Tschissik. Then while 
I was speaking with Mrs. Tschissik I observed that my 
•love had not really grasped her, but only flitted about her, 
now nearer, now farther. Indeed, it can find no peace. 

Mrs Liebgold acted a young man in a costume that 
tightly embraced her pregnant body. As she does not obey 
her father (Loviy), he presses the upper part of her body 
down on a chair and beats her over her very tightly 
trousered behind. Lowy said that he touched her with the 
same repugnance that he would a mouse Seen from the 
front, however, she is pretty, it is only in profile that her 
nose slants down too long, too pointed and too cruel. 

t first arrived at ten, took a walk and tasted to the full 
the slight nervousness of having a seat in the theater and 
going for a walk during the performance, that is, while 
the soloists were trying to sing me into my seat. I missed 
Mrs Klug too Listenmg to her always lively singing does 
nothing less than prove the solidity of the world, which is 
what I need, after all. 

Today at breakfast I spoke with my mother by chance 
about children and marriage, only a few words, but for 
the first time saw clearly how untrue and childish is the 
conception of me that my mother builds up for herself. 
She considers me a healthy young man who suffers a little 
from the notion that he is ill. This notion will disappear 



DIARIES I 9 I I 185 

by Itself with time, marriage, of course, ai;^d having chil- 
dren would put an end to it best of all. Then my interest 
in hterature >vould also be reduced to the degree that is 
perhaps necessary for an educated man. A matter-of-fact, 
undisturbed interest in 'my profession or in the factory or 
in whatever may come to hand will appear. Hence there 
is not the slightest, not the trace of a reason for permaneilt 
despair about my future. There is occasion for temporary 
despair, which is not veiy deep, however, whenever I. 
think my stomach is upset, or when I can’t sleep because I 
write too much. There are thousands of possible solutions. 
The most probable is that I shall suddenly fall in love 
with a girl and will never again want to do without her. 
Then I shall see how good their intentions toward me axe 
and how little they will interfere with me. But if I remain 
a bachelor like my uncle m Madrid, that too will be no 
misfortune because with my cleverness I shall know how 
to make adjustments. 

i 

December 23. Saturday. When I look at my whole vjay 
of hfe going in a direction that is foreign and false to all 
my relatives and acquaintances, the apprehension arises, 
and my father expresses it, that I shall become a second 
Uncle R.udolf, the fool of the new generation of the fam- 
ily, the fool somewhat altered to meet the needs of a dif- 
ferent period, butTrom now on I’ll be able to feel how 
my mother (whose opposition to this opmion grows con- 
tinually weaker in the course of the years) sums up and 
enforces everything that speaks for me and agaii^ Uncle 
Rudolf, and that enters like a wedge between the concep- 
tions entertained about the two of us. 


Day before yesterday in the factory. In the evening at 



i86 


FRANZ KAFKA 


Max’s where yhe artist, Novak, was just then display- 
ing the lithographs of Max. I could not express myself in 
their presence, could not say yes or no. Max voiced several 
opinions which he had already formed, whereupon my 
thinkmg revolved about them without result. Fmally I 
became accustomed to the mdividual lithographs, over- 
came at least the surprise of my unaccustomed eye, found 
a chin round, a face compressed, a chest armorlike, or 
•rather he looked as though he were wearing a giant dress 
shirt under his street clothes. The artist replied to this 
with something which was not to be understood either 
at the first or second attempt, weakening its significance 
only by saying it to us of all people who thus, if his opin- 
ions were proved to be genmnely correct, were in the 
position of having spoken the cheapest nonsense. 

He asserted that it is the felt and even conscious task of 
the artist to assimilate his subject to his own art form. To 
achieve this he had first prepared a portrait sketch in color, 
which also lay before us and which in dark colors showed 
a really too sharp, dry likeness (this too-great-sharpness 
I can acknowledge only now), and was declared by Max 
to be the best portrait, as, aside from its likeness about the 
eyes and mouth, it showed nobly composed features 
brought out in the right degree by the dark colons. If one 
were asked about it, one couldn’t deny it. From this sketch 
the artist now worked at home on his lithographs, endeav- 
oring in lithograph after lithograph to get farther and 
farther away from the natural phenomenon but at the 
same time not only not to violate his own art form but 
rather to come closer to it stroke by stroke. So, for in- 
stance, the ear lost its human convolutions and its clearly 
defined edge and became a sunken semicircular whorl 
around a small, dark opening. Max’s bony chin, starting 



, DIARIES 1911 187 

from th^ ear iteelf, lost its simple boundary^ indispensable 
as It seems, and a new one was as little created for the 
observer as a* new truth is created by the removal of the 
old. The hair flowed in sure, understandable outlines and 
remained human haur no matter how the artist denied it. 

After having demanded from us understanding of these 
transformations, the artist indicated only hastily, but with 
pride, that everything on these sheets had significance and 
that even the accidental was necessary because its effect ' 
influenced everything that followed. Thus, alongside one 
head a narrow, pale coffee stam extended almost the entire 
length of the picture, it was part of the whole, so intended, 
and not to be removed without damage to all the propor- 
tions. There was in the left comer of another sheet a 
thinly stippled, scarcely noticeable, large blue stain; this 
stain had even been placed there intentionally, for the sake 
of the slight illumination that passed from it across the 
picture, and which the artist had taken advantage of when 
he continued his work. His next objective was now chiefly 
the mouth on which something, but not enough, Ifad 
already been done, and then he intended to transform the 
nose too. In response to Max’s complaint that in this way 
.the lithograph would move farther and farther away from 
the beautiful color sketch, he observed that it wasn’t at 
all impossible that it should again approach it. 

One certainly could not overlook the sureness with 
which the artist relied throughout the discussion on the 
unexpected in his inspiration, and that only this rehance 
gaVe his work its best title to being almost a scientific one. 
—Bought two lithographs, “Apple Seller,” and “Walk.” 

I 

One advantage in keeping a diary is that you become 
aware with reassuring clarity of the changes which you 



i88 


FRANZ KAFKA' 


constantly suifer and which in a general wav are naturally 
beheved, surmised and admitted by you, but which you’ll 
unconsciously deny when it comes to the point of gaining 
hope or peace from such an admission. In the diary you 
find proof that m situations which today would seem un- 
bearable, you lived, looked around and wrote down ob- 
servations, that this right hand moved then as it does today, 
when we may be wiser because we are able to look back 
°upon our former condition, and for that very reason have 
got to admit the courage of our earlier striving m which 
we persisted even in sheer ignorance. 

All yesterday mommg my head was as if filled with mist 
from Werfel’s poems. For a moment I feared the enthu- 
siasm would carry me along straight mto nonsense. 

Tormenting discussion with Weltsch evening before 
last. My startled gaze ran up and down his face and throat 
for an hour. Once, in the midst of a facial distortion caused 
b)f excitement, weakness and bewilderment, I was not sure 
that I would get out of the room without permanent dam- 
age to our relationship. Outside, in the rainy weather m- 
tended for silent walking, I drew a deep breath of rehef* 
and then for an hour waited contentedly for M. if! front df 
the Orient. I find this sort of waiting, ^glancmg slowly at 
the clock and walking mdifferently up and down, almost 
as pleasant as lying on the sofa with legs stretched out and 
hands in my trouser pockets. (Half asleep, one then thinks 
one’s hands are no longer in the trouser pockets at all, But 
are lying clenched on top of one’s thighs.) 

December 24. Sunday. Yesterday it was gay at Baum’s. 
I was there with Weltsch. Max is in Breslau. I felt my- 



DIARIES I 9 I I 189 

self free, could carry every moment to it^ conclusion, I 
answered and listened properly, made the most noise, and 
if I occasionally said something stupid it did not loom 
large but blew over at once. The walk home in the rain 
with Weltsch was the’ same; despite puddles, wmd and 
cold it passed as quickly for us as though we had ridden. 
And we were both sorry to say goodbye. ' 


As a child I was anxiousi and if not anxious then uneasy, 
when my father spoke— as he often did, since he was a 
businessman— of the last day of the month (called the 
“ultimo”). Smce I wasn’t curious, and since I wasn’t able 
—even if I sometimes did ask about it— to digest the answer 
quickly enough with my slow thinkmg, and smce a weakly 
stirrmg curiosity once risen to the surface is often already 
satisfied by a question and an answer without requiring 
that it understand as weD, the expression “the last day of 
the month” remained a disquietmg rgystery for me, to be 
joined later (the result of having listened more attentiveljr) 
by the expression “ultimo,” even if the latter expression 
did not have the same great significance. It was bad too 
that the last day, dreaded so long in advance, could never 
*be completely done away with. Sometimes, when it passed 
with no special sign, indeed with no special attention (I 
realized only much later that it always came after about 
thirty days), and when the first had happily arrived, one 
again began to speak of the last day, not with special dread, 
to, be sure, but it was still something that I put without 
exa mina tion beside the rest of the incomprehensible. 


When I arrived at W.’s yesterday noon I heard the voice 
of his sister greeting me, but I did not see her herself until 



FRANZ KAFKA 


190 

her fragile figure deiached itself from the rocking chair 
standing in front of me. 

This morning my nephew’s circumcision. A short, bow- 
legged man, Austerlitz, who alr&dy has 2,800 circum- 
cisions behind him, carried the thmg out very skilfully. 
It is an operation made more difficult by the fact that the 
boy, instead of lying on a table, lies on his grandfather’s 
lap, and by the fact that the person performing the opera- 
tion, instead of paymg close attention, must whisper 
prayers. First the boy is prevented from moving by wrap- 
pings which leave only his member free, then the surface 
to be operated on is defined precisely by putting on a 
perforated metal disc, then the operation is performed with 
what is almost an ordinary loufe, a sort of fish knife. One 
sees blood and raw flesh, the moule bustles about briefly 
with his long-nailed, trembling fingers and pulls skin from 
some place or other over the wound like the finger of a 
glove. At once everything is all right, the child has scarcely 
ci^ed. Now there remains only a short prayer during which 
the moule drinks some wine and with his fingers, not yet 
entirely unbloody, carries some wine to the child’s lips. 
Those present pray. “As he has now achieved the cove- 
nant, so may he achieve knowledge of the Torab, a happy 
marriage and the performance of good deeds.” 

Today when I heard the moulds assistant say the grace 
after meals and those present, aside from the two grand- 
fathers, spent the time in dreams or boredom with a com- 
plete lack of understanding of the prayer, I saw Western 
European Judaism before me in a transition whose end is 
clearly unpredictable and about which those most closely 
affected are not concerned, but, like all people truly in 



DIARIES I91I I9I 

transmon, bear what is imposed upon then). It is so indis- 
putable that these religious forms which have reached their 
final end have merely a historical character, even as they 
are practiced today, that only a short time was needed this 
very morning to interest the people present in the obsolete 
custom of circumcision and its half -sung jJrayers by de- 
scribmg it to them as something out of history. ’ ' 

Low)-, whom I keep waiting half an hour almost every 
evening, said to me yesterday For several days I have been 
looking up at your window while waitmg. First I see a 
light there, if I have come early, as I usually do, I assume 
that you are still working. Then the light is put out, in the 
next room the light stays on, you are therefore having 
dinner, then the light goes on again in your room, you are 
therefore brushing your teeth; then the hght is put out, 
you are therefore already on the stairs, but then the light 
is put on again 

December 25. What I understand of contemporary Jew- 
ish hterature in Warsaw through Lowy, and of contem- 
porary Czech literature partly through my own insight, 
points to the fact that many of the benefits of hterature— 
the stirrmg of minds, the coherence of national conscious- 
ness, often unrealized in public life and always tending to 
disintegrate, the pride which a nation gams from a litera- 
ture of its own and the support it is afforded in the face 
of the hostile surrounding world, this keeping of a diary 
by a nation which is something entirely different from 
historiography and results in a more rapid (and yet always 
closely scrutinized) development, the spiritualization of 
the broad area of public life, the assimilation of dissatisfied 
elements that are immediately put to use precisely in this 



FRANZ KAFKA 


192 

sphere where ^only stagnation can do harm, the constant 
integration of a people with respect to its whole that the 
incessant bustle of the magazines creates, the narrowmg 
down of the attention of a nation upon itself and the 
accepting of what is foreign only' m reflecuon, the birth 
of a respect for those active m hterature, the transitory 
afwakening in the younger generation of higher aspira- 
tions, which nevertheless leaves its permanent mark, the 
■ acknowledgment of hterary events as objects of political 
sohcitude, the dignification of the antithesis between 
fathers and sons and the possibility of discussing this, the 
presentation of national faults in a manner that is very 
painful, to be sure, but also hberatmg and deserving of 
forgiveness, the beginning of a hvely and therefore self- 
respecting book trade and the eagerness for books— all 
these effects can be produced even by a literature whose 
development is not in actual fact unusually broad in scope, 
but seems to be, because it lacks outstanding talents. The 
livehness of such a literature exceeds even that of one 
rich in talent, for, as it has no writer whose great gifts 
could silence at least the majority of cavilers, literary 
competition on the greatest scale has a real justification. 

A literature not penetrated by a great talent has no gap 
through which the irrelevant might force its .way. I*s 
claim to attention thereby becomes more compelling. The 
independence of the individual writer, naturally only 
within the national boundaries, is better preserved. The 
lack of irresistible national models keeps the completely 
untalented away from literature. But even mediocre talent 
would not suffice for a writer to be influenced by the 
unstrikmg qualities of the fashionable writers of the mo- 
ment, or to introduce the works of foreign literatures, or 
to imitate the foreign literature that has already been intro- 



/)IARIES I 9 I I I9J 

duced, t);iis is plain, for example, in a literature rich in 
great talents, such as the German is, where the worst 
’ivriters limit their mutation to what they find at home. 
The creative and beneficent force exerted in these direc- 
tions by a literature poor in its component parts proves 
especially effective when it begins to create a hterary his- 
tory out of the records of its dead writers. These writers’ 
undeniable influence, past and present, becomes so matter 
of fact that it can take the place of their wntmgs. One 
speaks of the latter and means the former, indeed, one even 
reads the latter and sees only the former. But since that 
effect cannot be forgotten, and since the wntmgs them- 
selves do not act independently upon the memory, there is 
no forgetting and no remembermg again. Literary history 
offers an unchangeable, dependable whole that is hardly 
affected by the taste of the day. 

A small nation’s memory is not smaller than the memory 
of a large one and so can digest the existmg material more 
thoroughly. There are, to be sure, fewer experts in literary 
history employed, but literature is less a concern of literary 
history than of the people, and thus, if not purely, it is at 
least reliably preserved For the claim that the national 
A:onsciousness of a small people makes on the individual is 
shch thac*everyone must always be prepared to know that 
part of the literature which has come down to him, to sup- 
port it, to defend it— to defend it even if he does not know 
it and support it. 

The old writings acquire a multiplicity of interpreta- 
tidns; despite the mediocre material, this goes on with an 
energy that is restrained only by the fear that one may too 
easily exhaust them, and by the reverence they are ac- 
corded by common consent. Everything is done very 
honestly, only within a bias that is never resolved, that, 



FRANZ KAFKA 


194 

refuses to countenance any weariness, and is spread for 
miles around when a skilful hand is lifted up.‘ But m the end 
bias interferes not only with a broad view but with a closi 
insight as well— so that all these observations are canceled 
out. 

Since people lack a sense of context, their literary activi- 
ties are out of context too. They depreciate something in 
order to be able to look down upon it from above, or they 
praise it to the skies in order to have a place up there beside 
it. (Wrong.) Even though something is often thought 
through calmly, one still does not reach the boundary 
where it connects up with similar things, one reaches this 
boundary soonest m politics, mdeed, one even strives to see 
it before it is there, and often sees this limiting boundary 
everywhere. The narrowness of the field, the concern too 
for simplicity and uniformity, and, finally, the considera- 
tion that the inner independence of the literature makes the 
external connection with pohtics harmless, result in the 
dissemination of literature withm a country on the basis 
of pohtical slogans. 

There is universal delight in the literary treatment of 
petty themes whose scope is not permitted to exceed the 
capacity of small enthusiasms and which are sustained by 
their polemical possibilities. Insults, intended as ilteraturfe, 
roll back and forth, among the more violent temperaments 
they fly back and forth. What in great literature goes on 
down below, constituting a not indispensable cellar of the 
structure, here takes place in the full light of day, what is 
there a matter of passing interest for a ^ew, here absorbs 
everyone no less than as a matter of life and death. 

A character sketch of the literature of small peoples. 

Good results in both cases. 



DIARIES I9I I 195 

Here the results in individual instances are even better. 

1. Liveliness: 

a. Conflict. 

b. Schools. 

c. Magazines. 

2. Less constraint: 

a. Absence of principles. 

b. Minor themes. 

c. Easy formation lof symbols. 

d. Throwing off of the untalented. 

3. Popularity. 

a. Connection with politics. 

b. Literary history. 

c. Faith in literature, can make up their own laws. 

It is difficult to readjust when one has felt this useful, 
happy life in all one’s being. 

Circumcision in Russia. Throughbut the house, wher- 
ever there is a door, tablets the size of a hand printed vsith 
Kabbalistic symbols are hung up to protect the mother 
from evil spirits during the time between the birth and 
the circumcision. The evil spirits are especially dangerous 
to her and the child at this time, perhaps because her body 
is so very open and therefore offers an easy entrance to 
everything evil anfl because the child too, so long as it has 
not been accepted into the covenant, can offer no resist- 
ance to evil. That is also the reason why a female attendant 
is^aken in, so that the mother may not remain alone for 
a moment. For seven days after the birth, except on Friday, 
also in order to ward 'off evil spirits, ten to fifteen children, 
always different ones, led by die belfer (assistant teacher), 
are admitted to the bedside of the mother, there repeat the 



FRANZ K.AFKA 


196 

Shema Israel, and are then given eandy. These innocent, 
five- to eight-year-old children are supposed to be espe- 
cially effective in driving back the evil spirits, who pres: 
forward most strongly toward evemng. On Friday a spe- 
cial celebraaon is held, just as in general one banquet 
follows another during this week. Before the day of the 
circumcision the evil ones are wildest, and so the last mght 
is a mght of wakefulness and until morning someone 
watches beside the mother. T^e circumcision follows, 
often in the presence of more than a hundred relatives and 
friends. The most distinguished person present is permitted 
to carry the child. The circumciser, who performs his 
office without payment, is usually a drinker— busy as he is, 
he has no time for the various holiday foods and so simply 
pours down some brandy. Thus they all have red noses 
and reeking breaths. It is therefore not very pleasant when, 
after the operation has been performed, they suck the 
bloody member with this mouth, in the prescribed man- 
ner. The member is then sprinkled with sawdust and 
heals in about three days. 

A close-knit family life does not seem to be so very com- 
mon among and characteristic of the Jews, especially those 
in Russia Family hfe is also found among Christians, after 
all, and the fact that women are excluded from the study 
of the Talmud is really destructive of Jewish family life, 
when the man wants to discuss learned talmudic matters— 
the very core of his hfe— with guests, the women withdraw 
to the next room even if they need not do so-so it is even 
more characteristic of the Jews that they come together 
at every possible opportunity, whether to pray or to study 
or to discuss divine matters or to eat holiday meals whose 
basis is usually a religious one and at which alcohol is 



^ DIARIES 1911 197 

drunk o^y very moderately. Tliey flee to pne another, so 
to speak. 

Goethe probably retards the development of the Ger- 
man language by the force of his writing. Even though 
prose style has often traveled away from him in the 
interim, sail, in the end, as at present, it returns to hdn 
with strengthened yeammg and even adopts obsolete 
idioms found in Goethe imt otherwise without any par- - 
ticular connection with him, in order to rejoice in the 
completeness of its unlimited dependence. 

In Hebrew my name is Amschel, like my mother’s ma- 
ternal grandfather, whom my mother, who as six years 
old when he died, can remember as a very pious and 
learned man XMth a long, white beard. She remembers 
how she had to take hold of the toes of the corpse and 
ask forgiveness for any offense she may have committed 
agamst her grandfather. She also remembers her grand- 
father’s many books which lined the walls. He bathed in 
the nv^er every day, even m wmter, when he chopped a 
hole in the ice for his bath. My mother’s mother died of 
, typhus at an early age From the time of this death her 
grandm<9ther became melancholy, refused to eat, spoke 
with no one, once, a year after the death of her daughter, 
she went for a walk and did not return, her body was 
found in the Elbe. An even more learned man than her 
grandfather was my mother’s great-grandfather, Chris- 
tians and Jews .held him in equal honor; during a fire a 
miracle took place as a result of his piety, the flames 
jumped over and spared his house while the houses around 
it burned down. He had four sons, one was converted to 
Christianity and became a doctor. All but my mother’s 



ipS FRAKZ KAFKA ^ 

grandfather d\ed young. He had one son, whom my 
mother knew as crazy Uncle Nathan, and 6ne daughter, 
my mother’s mother. 

To run against the window and, weak after exerting all 
one’s strength, to step over the window sill through the 
sjllintered wood and glass. 

December z6. Slept badly again, the thurd night now. 
So the three holidays durmg which I had hoped to write 
things which were to have helped me through the whole 
year, I spent m a state requiring help. On Christmas Eve, 
walk with Lowy in the direction of Stem. Yesterday 
Blumale oder die Perle von Warschau. For her steadfast 
love and loyalty Blumale is distmguished by the author 
with the honorific title, “Pearl of Warsaw,” in the name 
of the play. Only the exposed, long, delicate throat of 
Mrs. Tschissik explains the shape of her face. The glint of 
tears in Mrs King’s eyes when singing a monotonously 
rhythmic melody mto which the audience lets them heads 
hang, seemed to me by far to surpass in significance the 
song, the theater, the cares of all the audience, mdeed my 
imagination. View through the back curtain into the dress- 
ing room, directly to Mrs. King, who is standing® there iri 
a white petticoat and a short-sleeved shirt My uncertainty 
about the feelings of the audience and therefore my strenu- 
ous inner spurring on of its enthusiasm. The skilful, ami- 
able manner in which I spoke to Miss T and her escort 
yesterday. It was part of the freedom of the good spirits 
which I felt yesterday and even as early as Saturday, 
that, although it was definitely not necessary, because of a 
certain complaisance toward the world and a reckless 
modesty I made use of a few seemingly embarrassed words 



DIARIES I9II 199 

and gestures. I was alone with my mother^ and that too I 
took easily and well, looked at everyone with steadiness. 

List of things which today are easy to imagine as anaent: 
the crippled beggars on the way to promenades and picnic 
places, the umlluminated atmosphere at mght, the crossed 
gurders of the bridge. 

A hst of those passages,in Dicbtung und Wahrheit that, -- 
by a peculiarity' on which one cannot place one’s finger, 
give an unusually strong impression of liveliness not essen- 
tially consistent with what is actually described, for in- 
stance, call up the image of the boy Goethe, how— curious, 
richly dressed, loved and hvely— he makes his way into the 
homes of all his acquaintances so that he may see and hear 
everythmg that is to be seen and heard. Now, when I leaf 
through the book, I cannot find any such passages, they 
all seem clear to me and have a hveliness that cannot be 
heightened by any accident. I must wait until some time 
when I am reading mnocently along and then stop afrthe 
right passages. 

It is unpleasant to hsten to Father talk with incessant 
uisinuatwns about the good fortune of people today and 
especially of his children, about the sufferings he had to 
endure in his youth. No one demes that for years, as a 
result of insufficient wmter clothing, he had open sores 
on his legs, that he often went hungry, that when he was 
only ten he had to push a cart through the villages, even 
in winter and very early in the morning— but, and this is 
something he will riot understand, these facts, taken to- 
gether with the further fact that I have not gone through 
all this, by no means lead to the conclusion that I have been 



zoo 


FRANZ KAFKA 


happier than hp, that he may pnde himself on these sores 
on his legs, which is something he assumes and asserts 
from the very beginnmg, that I cannot appreciate his past 
sufferings, and that, finally, just because I have not gone 
through the same sufferings I must be endlessly grateful 
to him. How gladly I would listen if he would talk on 
about his youth and parents, but to hear all this m a 
boastful and quarrelsome tone is torment. Over and over 
again he claps his hands together: “Who can understand 
that today' What do the children know! No one has gone 
through that' Does a child understand that today!” He 
spoke again in the same way today to Aunt Juhe, who was 
visiting us. She too has the huge face of all Father’s rela- 
tives. There is something wrong and somewhat disturb- 
ing about the set or color of her eyes. At the age of ten 
she was hired out as a cook. In a skimpy wet skirt, in the 
severe cold, she had to run out for something, the skin 
on her legs cracked, the skimpy skirt froze and it was only 
that evening, m bed, that it dried. 

r 

December 27. An unfortunate man, one who is con- 
demned to have no children, is terribly imprisoned in his 
misfortune. Nowhere a hope for revival, for help from 
luckier stars. He must live his life afflicted by 'his mis- 
fortune, and when its circle is ended must resign himself 
to it and not start out again to see whether, on a longer 
path, under other circumstances of body and time, the 
misfortune which he has suffered could disappear or even 
produce something good. 

My feeling when I write something that is wrong might 
be depicted as follows: In front of two holes in the ground 
a man is waiting for somethmg to appear that can rise up 



301 


^ DIARIES I 9 I I 

onh" out of the hole on his nght. But u this hole re- 
mains covered over bv a dimly visible lid. one thin? after 
another rises up out of the hole on his left, keeps trying 

attract his attention, and in rlie end succeeds in doii^ 
this Vi'ithout any difiicultv because of its sweliin^ 
which, much as the man may tr)' to prevent it, nnatty 
covers up even the right hole. But the man— he does dot 
want ro leave this place, and mdeed refuses to at anv price 
—has norhing bur these appearances, and although— fleet- 
ing as they are, their strength is used up bv their n^rdv 
appearing- they cannot satisfy him, he soil staves, when- 
ever out of "ft eakness thev are arrested in their rising 
to drive them up and scatter them into the air if only Ite 
can thus bang up others, for the permanent sight of one 
is unbearable, and moreover he contmues to hope that after 
the false appearances have been exhausted, the true will 
finally appear. 

How weak this piccore is An incoherent assumpdon is 
thrust like a board benveen the actual feeling and the meta- 
phor of the descripuon. • 


December :S The torment that the factory- causes me. 
^Miy didn't I object when they made me promise to work 
•there irpche afternoons No one used force to make me do 


it, but my father compels me by his reproaches, Karl by 
his silence and f bv my consciousness of guilt. I know 
nothing about the factory, and this morning, when die 
committee made an inspecdon. I stood around useless^ 
^idth my tail betw een my legs. I deny that it is possible for 
me to fathom all the details of the operation of the fac- 


tory. And if I should succeed in doing it by’ endlessty^ 
qnesdoning and pestering all diose concerned, what vnMdd 
I have achieved? I would be able to do nothing pnKtkal 



202 


FRANZ KAFKA 


With this knowledge, I am fit only for spectacular per- 
formances to which the sound common sense of iny boss 
adds the salt that makes it look like a really good job. But ' 
through this empty effort spent on the factory I would, or. 
the other hand, rob myself of the use of the few afternoon 
hours that belong to me, which would of necessity lead to 
the complete destruction of my existence, which, even 
apart from this, becomes more and more hedged in. 

This afternoon, while taking a walk, for the duration 
of a few steps I saw commg toward me or crossmg my 
path entirely imagmary members of the committee that 
caused me such anxiety this morning. 

December 29. Those lively passages in Goethe. Page 
265, “I therefore led my friend mto the woods.” 

Goethe. 307. “Now I heard during these hours no other 
conversation save wh^t concerned medicine or natural 
history, and my imagination was drawn in quite another 
direction.” 

The difficulties of bringing to an end even a short essay 
lie not m the fact that we feel the end of the piece , demands 
a fire which the actual content up to that point has not 
been able to produce out of itself, they arise rather from 
the fact that even the shortest essay demands of the 
author a degree of self-satisfaction and of being lost in 
himself out of which it is difficult to step into the every- 
day air without great determination and an external incen- 
tive, so that, before the essay is rounded to a close and one 
might quietly slip away, one bolts, driven by unrest, and 
then the end must be completed from the outside with 



^ DIARIES I 9 I I 


203 


hands which must not only do the work, but hold on as 
well. 


December 30. My urge to imitate has nothing of the 
actor m it, its chief lack is unity. The whole range of those 
characteristics which are rough and striking, I cannot imi- 
tate at all, I have always failed when I attempted it, it is 
contrai^’^ to my nature. On the other hand, I have a decided 
urge to mutate them in their details, the way certain people ' 
manipulate walkmg sucks, the way they hold their hands, 
the movements of their fingers, and I can do it without 
any effort. But this very effortlessness, this thirst for imita^ 
tion, sets me apart from the actor, because this effortless- 
ness reflects itself in the fact that no one is aware that I 
am imitaung. Only my own satisfied, or more often re- 
luctant, appreciation shows me that I have been successful 
Far beyond this external imitation, however, goes the 
inner, which is often so strikmg and strong that there is no 

room at all within me to obsen’e and verify it, and it first 

¥ 

confronts me in my memor}'. But here the imitauon Is so 
complete and replaces my own self with so immediate a 
suddenness that, even assuming it could be made \Tsible 
, at all. It would be unbearable on the stage. The spectator 
tannot l 9 e asked to endure what passes beyond the bounds 
of play-acung. If an actor who is supposed to thrash an- 
other according to the plot really does thrash him, out of 
excitement, out of an excera of emouon, and the other 
actor screams in pain, then the spectator must become a 
iftan and intervene But what seldom happens in this way 
happens countless times in lesser ways. The essence of die 
bad actor consists not in the fact that he imitates too litde, 
but rather in the fact that as a result of gaps in his educa- 
don, experience and talent he imitates the wrong models. 



FRANZ KAFKA 


204 

But his most essential fault is still that he does not observe 
the hmits of tlie play and mutates too much. His hazy 
notion of the demands of the stage drives him to this, and 
even if the spectator thinks one actor or another is bad' 
because he stands around stiffly, toys with his fingers at 
the edge of his pocket, puts his hands on his hips im- 
properly, listens for the prompter, in spite of the fact that 
things have changed completely maintains an anxious so- 
'■lemnity regardless, still, even tins actor who suddenly 
dropped from nowhere on the stage is bad only because he 
imitates too much, even if he does so only in his mind. (De- 
cember 3 1 .) For the very reason that his abilities are so lim- 
ited, he IS afraid to give less than all he has Even though his 
ability may not be so small that it cannot be divided up, he 
does not want to betray the fact that under certain circum- 
stances, by the exercise of his own will, he can dispose of 
less than all his art. 

In the morning I felt so fresh for writing, but now the 
iderf that I am to read to Max in the afternoon blocks me 
completely. This shows too how unfit I am for friendship, 
assuming that friendship m this sense is even possible. For 
since a friendship without interruption of one’s daily hfe 
is unthinkable, a great many of its manifestations aTe blown 
away time and again, even if its core remains undamaged. 
From the undamaged core they are formed anew, but as 
every such formation requires time, and not everything 
that is expected succeeds, one can never, even aside from 
the change in one’s personal moods, pick up again wheie 
one left off last time. Out of this, in friendships that have 
a deep foundation, an uneasiness must arise before every 
fresh meeting which need not be so great that it is felt as 
such, but which can disturb one’s conversation and behav- 



DIARIES I9I I 205 

J 

ior to such a degree that one is consciously astonished, es- 
pecially ds onejis not aware of, or cannot believe, the reason 
for It. So ho\>f am I to read to M. or even think, while writ- 
ing down what follows, that I shall read it to him. 

Besides, I am disturbed by my havmg leafed through 
the diary this morning to see what I could read to M. 
In this examination I have found neither that what I haife 
written so far is especially valuable nor that it must simply 
be thrown away. My opinion hes between the two and 
closer to the first, yet it is not of such a nature that, judg- 
ing by the value of what I have written, I must, m spite 
of my weakness, regard myself as exhausted. Despite that, 
the sight of the mass of what I had written diverted me 
almost irrecoverably from the fountainhead of my writing 
for the next hour, because my attention was to a certain 
extent lost downstream, as it were, in the same channel. 

WhOe I sometimes think that all through the time I was 
at the Gymnasium and before that,’ as well, I was able to 
think unusually clearly, and only the later weakening of*my 
memory prevents me from judging it correctly today, I still 
recognize at other times that my poor memory is only try- 
^ing to flatter me and that I was mentally inert, at least in 
things themselves insignificant but having serious conse- 
quences. So I remember that when I was at the Gymnasium 
I often— even if not very thoroughly, I probably tired easily 
even then— argued the existence of God with Bergmann 
in a talmudic style either my own or imitated from him. At 
the time I liked to begin with a theme I had found in a 
Christian magazine (I believe it 'wtsDie chnstltche W elt) in 
which a watch and the world and the watchmaker and God 
were compared to one another, and the existence of the 
watchmaker was supposed to prove that of God. In my 



2o6 


FRANZ KAFKA 


opinion I was able to refute this very well as far asBergmann 
was concerned, even though this refutation was rfot firmly 
grounded in me and I had to piece it together for myself 
like a jigsaw puzzle before using it. Such a refutation once 
took place while we "were walking around the Rathaus 
tower. I remember this clearly because once, years ago, we 
rfeminded each other of it. 

But while I thought I was distinguishing myself— I had no 
other motive than the desire to distinguish myself and my 
joy in making an impression and in the impression itself— 
it was only as a result of giving it insufficient thought that 
I endured always having to go around dressed in the 
wretched clothes which my parents had made for me by 
one customer after another, longest by a tailor in Nusle I 
naturally noticed— it was obvious— that I was unusually 
badly dressed, and even had an eye for others who were 
well dressed, but for years on end my mind did not succeed 
in recognizing in my clothes the cause of my miserable ap- 
pearance. Since even at that time, more in tendency than in 
fact, I was on the way to underestimating myself, I was 
convinced that it was only on me that clothes assumed this 
appearance, first looking as stiff as a board, then hanging in 
wrinkles. I did not want new clothes at all, for if I was going 
to look ugly in any case, I wanted at least to be comfortable 
and also to avoid exhibiting the ugliness of the new clothes 
to the world that had grown accustomecTto the old ones. 
These always long-drawn-out refusals on the frequent oc- 
casions when my mother (who with the eyes of an adult 
was still able to find differences between these new clothes 
and the old ones) wanted to have new clothes of this sort 
made for me, had this effect upon me that, with my parents 
concurring, I had to conclude that I was not at all con- 
cerned about my appearance. 



DIARIES 1912 207 

January 2 . As a result I let the awful clothes affect even 
my posfure, walked around with my batk bowed, my 
shoulders drooping, my hands and arms at awkward angles, 
yas afraid of mirrors because they showed in me an ugliness 
which m my opinion was inevitable, which moreover could 
not have been an entirely truthful reflection, for had I actu- 
ally looked like that, I certainly would have attracted ev6n 
more attention, suffered gentle pokes in the back from my 
mother on Sunday walks and admonitions and prophecies 
which were much too abstract for me to be able to relate 
them to the worries I then had. In general I lacked princi- 
pally the ability to provide even in the slightest detail for 
the real future I thought only of things in the present and 
their present condition, not because of thoroughness or any 
special, strong interest, but rather, to the extent that weak- 
ness in thinking was not the cause, because of sorrow and 
fear— sorrow, because the present was so sad for me that I 
thought I could not leave it before it resolved itself into 
happiness, fear, because, like my fear of the slightest action 
in the present, I also considered myself, in view of my con- 
temptible, childish appearance, unworthy of forming a seri- 
ous, responsible opinion of the great, manly future which 
, usually seemed so impossible to me that every short step 
forward appeared to me to be counterfeit and the next step 
unattainable. 

I admitted the possibility of miracles more readily than 
that of real progress, but was too detached not to keep the 
sphere of miracles and that of real progress sharply divided. 
Iwas therefore able to spend a good deal of time before fall- 
ing asleep in imagining that someday, a rich man in a coach 
and four, I would drive into the Jewish quarter, with a 
magic word set free a beautiful maiden who was being 
beaten unjustly, and carry her off in my coach; but un- 



208 


FRANZ KAFKA 


touched by this silly make-believe, which probably fed only 
on an already unhealthy sexuality, I remained convinced 
tha t T would not pass my final examinations rhat year, and 
if I did, I would not get on in the next class, and if by some 
swindle I could avoid even that, then I would certainly fail 
decisively in my graduation examination, convinced also 
that I would all at once— the precise moment did not matter 
—reveal some unheard-of inability and very definitely sur- 
prise my parents as well as the rest of the world, who had 
been lulled to sleep by my outwardly regular progress. 
Since I always looked only to my inability as my guide into 
the future— only seldom to my feeble literary work— con- 
sidering the future never did me any good, it was only a 
spinning out of my present grief. If I chose to, I could of 
course walk erect, but it made me tired, nor could I see how 
a crooked back would hurt me in the future. If I should 
have a future, then, I felt, everything will straighten itself 
out of Its own accord. I did not choose such a principle be- 
cause it involved a confidence in a future in whose existence 
I did not believe, its purpose was only to make living easier 
for me, to walk, to dress, to wash, to read, above all to coop 
myself up at home in a way that took the least effort and re- 
quured the least spirit. If I went beyond that I could think 
only of ridiculous solutions. ' 

Once it seemed impossible to get along without a black 
dress suit, especially as I also had to decide whether I would 
join a dancing class. The tailor in Nusle was sent for and 
the cut of the suit discussed. I was undecided, as I always 
was in such cases, they made me afraid that by a definite 
statement I would be swept away not only into an immedi- 
ate unpleasantness, but beyond that into something even 
worse. So at first I didn’t want a dress suit, but when they 
shamed me before the stranger by pointing out that I had 



, DIARIES 1912 209 

no dress suit, I put up with having a tail coaj discussed; but 
since I regarded a tail coat as a fearful revolution one could 
forever talk about but on which one could never decide, we 
agreed on a tuxedo, wfjich, because of its similarity to the 
usual sack coat, seemed to me at least bearable But when I 
heard that the vest of the tuxedo had to be cut low and 
I would therefore have to wear a stiff shirt as well, my de- 
termination almost exceeded my strength, since something 
like this had to be avertdh. I did not want such a tuxedo, 
rather, if I had to have one, a tuxedo lined and trimmed with 
silk indeed, but one that could be buttoned high. The tailor 
had never heard of such a tuxedo, but he remarked that no 
matter what I intended to do with such a jacket, it couldn’t 
be worn for dancing. Good, then it couldn’t be worn for 
dancing, I didn’t want to dance anyhow, that hadn’t been 
decided on yet in any case, on the contrary, I wanted the 
jacket made for me as I had described it The tailor’s stub- 
bornness was increased by the fact that until now I had al- 
ways submitted with shamed haste to being measured for 
new clothes and to having them tried on, without expressing 
any opinions or wishes. So there was nothing else for me to 
do, and also since my mother insisted on it, but to go with 
him, painful as it was, across the Altstadter Ring to a second- 
hand cloiSung store in the window of which I had for quite 
some time seen displayed a simple tuxedo and had recog- 
nized it as suitable for me. But unfortunately it had already 
been removed from the window, I could not see it inside the 
store even by looking my hardest, I did not dare to go into 
the store just to look at the tuxedo, so we returned, dis- 
agreeing as before I felt as though the future tuxedo was 
already cursed by the uselessness of this errand, at least I 
used my annoyance with the pros and cons of the argument 
as an excuse to send the tailor away with some small order 



210 


FRANZ KAFKA 


or Other and ap indefinite promise about the tuxedo while 
I, under the reproaches of my mother, remained wearily 
behind, barred forever— everything happened to me forever 
—from girls, an elegant appearance and dances The in- 
stantaneous cheerfulness that this induced in me made me 
miserable, and besides, I was afraid that I had made myself 
ridiculous before the tailor as none of his customers ever 
had before. 

I* 

January 3 Read a good deal in Die Neue Rundschau. Be- 
ginning of the novel Der nackte Mann.^^ The clarity of the 
whole a little too thin, sureness in the details. Gabriel Schil- 
lings Flucht by Hauptmann. Education of people. Instruc- 
tive in the bad and the good. 

New Year’s Eve I had planned to read to Max from the 
diaries in the afternoon, I looked forward to it, and it did 
not come off. We were not m tune, I felt a calculating petti- 
ness and haste in him that afternoon, he was almost not my 
frifnd but nevertheless still dommated me to the extent that 
through his eyes I saw myself uselessly leafing through the 
notebooks over and over agam, and found this leafing back 
and forth, which continually showed the same pages flying 
by, disgusting It was naturally impossible to work together 
in this mutual tension, and the one page of “Richard and 
Samuel” that we finished amidst mutual resistance is simply 
proof of Max’s energy, but otherwise bad New Year’s Eve 
at Cada’s Not so bad, because Weltsch, Kisch and someone 
else added new blood so that finally, although only witRin 
the limits of that group, I again found my way back to 
Max. I then pressed his hand on the crowded Graben, 
though without looking at him, and with my three note- 
books pressed to me, as I remember, proudly went straight 
home. 



DIARIES 1912 2 II 

) 

The fern-shaped flames blazing up from a melting pot 
on the sdreet 19 front of a building under construction. 

) 

It is easy to recognize a concentration in me of all my 
forces on writmg. When it became clear in my organism 
that writing was the most productive direction for my 
being to take, everything rushed m that direction and left 
empty all those abilities which were directed toward the 
)oys of sex, eating, drinking, philosophical reflection and 
above all music I atrophied m all these directions This was 
necessary because the totality of my strengths was so shght 
that only collectively could they even halfway serve the 
purpose of my writing Naturally, I did not And this pur- 
pose independently and consciously, it found itself, and is 
now interfered with only by the office, but that interferes 
with It completely. In any case I shouldn’t complain that 
I can’t put up with a sweetheart, that I understand almost 
exactly as much of love as I do of music and have to resign 
myself to the most superficial effects I may pick up, that 
on New Year’s Eve I dined on parsnips and spinach, washed 
down with a glass of Ceres, and that on Sunday I was unable 
to take part in Max’s lecuire on his philosophical work— the 
.compensation for all this is clear as day. My development is 
now complete and, so far as I can see, there is nothing left 
to sacrifice, I need only throw my work in the office out of 
this complex in order to begin my real life in which, with 
the progress of my work, my face will finally be able to age 
in a natural way. 

» 

The sudden turn a conversation takes when in the discus- 
sion, which at first has dealt in detail with worries of the 
inner existence, the question is raised (not really breaking 
the conversation off, but naturally not growmg out of it. 



212 


FRANZ KAFKA 


either) of when and where one will meet the next tune and 
the circumstan;:es that must be considered in deciding thiST 
And if the conversation also ends with a shaking of hands, 
then one takes one’s leave with momentary faith m the pure, 
firm structure of our life and with respect for it. 

cin an autobiography one cannot avoid writing “often” 
where truth would require that “once” be written. For one 
always remains conscious that tl?e word “once” explodes 
that darkness on which the memory draws; and though it is 
not altogether spared by the word “often,” either, it is at 
least preserved in the opinion of the writer, and he is car- 
ried across parts which perhaps never existed at all in his life 
but serve him as a substitute for those which his memory 
can no longer even guess at. 

January 4. It is only because of my vanity that I hke so 
much to read to my sisters (so that today, for instance, it 
is already too late to write). Not that I am convinced that 
I shfdl achieve something significant in the reading, it is 
only that I am dominated by the passion to get so close to 
the good works I read that I merge with them, not through 
my own merit, indeed, but only through the attentiveness 
of my listening sisters, which has been excited h^y what i*! 
being read and is unresponsive to unessentials; and there- 
fore too, under the concealment my vanity affords me, I 
can share as creator in the effect which the work alone has 
exercised That is why I really read admirably to my sisters 
and stress the accents with extreme' exactness just as I feel 
them, because later I am abundantly rewarded not only by 
myself but also by my sisters. 

But if I read to Brod or Baum or others, just because of 
my pretensions my reading must appear horribly bad to 



DIARIES 1912 213 

everyone, even if they know nothing of the usual quality 
of my reading, for here I know that the listener is fully 
aware of the separation between me and what is being read, 
here I cannot merge completely with what I read without 
becoming ridiculous iii my own opimon, an opinion which 
can expect no support from the hstener, with my voice I 
flutter around what is being read, try to force my wayin 
here and there because they want me to, but don’t mtend 
this seriously because they don’t expect that much from 
me at all, but what they really want me to do, to read 
without vanity, calmly and distantly, and to become pas- 
sionate only when a genuine passion demands it, that I can- 
not do, but although I beheve that I have resigned myself 
to reading badly to everyone except my sisters, my vanity, 
which this time has no justification, still shows itself. I feel 
oflFended if anyone finds fault with my reading, I become 
flushed and want to read on quickly, just as I usually strive, 
once I have begun, to read on endlessly, out of an uncon- 
scious yearning that during the course of the long reading 
there may be produced, at least m me, that vain, false Reel- 
ing of integration with what I read which makes me forget 
that I shall never be strong enough at any one moment to 
^impose my feelings on the clear vision of the listener and 
that at home it is always my sisters who initiate this longed- 
for substitution. 

January 5. For two days I have noticed, whenever I 
choose to, an inner coolness and indifference. Yesterday 
evening, during my walk, every little street sound, every 
eye turned toward me, every picture in a showcase, was 
more important to iile than myself. 


Uniformity. History 



FRANZ KAFKA 


214 

When It looks as if you had made up your mind finally 
to stay at horn,- for the evening, when yot) have put on 
your house jacket and sat down after supper with a light 
on the table to the piece of work or the game that usually 
precedes your going to bed, when the weather outside is 
unpleasant so that staying indoors seems natural, and when 
ydu have already been sittmg quietly at the table for so 
long that your departure must occasion not only paternal 
anger but surprise to everyone, when besides, the stairs are 
in darkness and the front door locked and in spite of all 
that you have started up m a sudden fit of restlessness, 
changed your jacket, abruptly dressed yourself for the 
street, explained that you must go out and with a few curt 
words of leave-taking actually gone out, banging the flat 
door more or less hastily according to the degree of dis- 
pleasure you think you have left behind you and so cut off 
the general discussion of your departure, and when you 
find yourself once more in the street with limbs swinging 
extr^ freely in answer to the unexpected liberty you have 
procured for them, when as a result of this decisive action 
you feel aroused within yourself all the potentialities of de- 
cisive action, when you recognize with more than usual 
significance that your strength is greater than your need to 
accomplish effortlessly the swiftest of changes, that left 
alone you grow in understanding and calm, and in the en- 
joyment of them— then for that evening you have so com- 
pletely got away from your family that the most distant 
journey could not take you farther and you have lived 
through what is for Europe so extreme an experience of 
solitude that one can only call it Russian. All this is stdl 
heightened if at such a late hour in the evening you look up 
a friend to see how he is getting on.'*® 



i 

J[5^ ‘YV"‘ 

/vt^^^MA /''\y^ jA/JC g^^eh 

/V^ P a 

0lA/sf\ (AA/^ “ /w\B/ 8J^ /iwA/ 4 /u^ CX/U . 

g;l4^''^K:^DO~>4i<i /ttv^Ma^ (^W/CUa-vvAw^ 

^OsA/VA/J^ jl\XAAA,^'^A». ^ °/AAC;^^-to^ WtWAA- /Wa^ flAvft^ 

!{eJU-> ^ TjNAYy^^'^ oUa^’-oXa 

-V^A- oiAY>wT 4 ^ 1^ 

fi^t ^ f ~^ ' ip ^ xf ^ . 

^tpiiAAA-A 

A, I . cvvaLvaia# VWX, ww aaaa^ 


■ /"■ n 

/VkAA^ . 

uJ^Xy^ , ^ 




A Manuscript Page of the Dkries 

(see facing page) 




DIARIES 1912 215 

Invited Weltsch to come to Mrs, King’s benefit. Lowy, 
with hiSj severe headaches that probably indicate a serious 
head ailment, leaned against a wall down in the street where 
he was waiting for me, his right hand pressed in despair 
Sgainst his forehead. I pointed him out to Weltsch who, 
from his sofa, leaned out of the wmdow. I thought it was 
the first time in my life that I had so easily observed from 
the window an incident down m the street that concerned 
me so closely. In and of itself, this kind of observation is 
familiar to me from Sherlock Holmes. 

January 6. Yesterday Vtzekonig by Feimann. My recep- 
tivity to the Jewishness in these plays deserts me because 
they are too monotonous and degenerate into a wailing that 
prides itself on isolated, violent outbreaks. When I saw the 
first plays it was possible for me to think that I had come 
upon a Judaism on which the beginnings of my own rested, 
a Judaism that was developing in my direction and so 
would enlighten and carry me farther along in my own 
clumsy Judaism, instead, it moves farther away from me 
the more I hear of it. The people remain, of course, and I 
hold fast to them. 

Mrs. Klug was giving a benefit and therefore sang several 
Vew song^ and made a few new jokes. But only her opening 
song held me wholly under her influence, after that I had 
the strongest reaction to every detail of her appearafice, 
to her arms, stretched out when she sings, and her snapping 
fingers, to the tightly twisted curls at her temples, to her 
tljin shirt, flat and innocent under her vest, to her lower lip 
that she pursed once while she savored the effect of a joke 
(“Look, I speak every language, but in Yiddish”), to her 
fat httle feet in their thick white stockings. But when she 
sang new songs yesterday she spoiled the main effect she 



2x6 


FRANZ KAFKA 


had on me, which lay in the fact that here was a person 
exhibiting hersc If who had discovered a few jokes and 
songs that revealed her temperament and all its strong 
points to the utmost perfection. When this display is a 
success, everythmg is a success, and if we like to let this 
person affect us often, we will naturally— and in this, per- 
haps, all the audience agrees with me— not let ourselves be 
misled by the constant repetition of the songs, which are 
always the same, we will rather approve of it as an aid to 
concentration, like the darkenmg of the hall, for example, 
and, as far as the woman is concerned, recognize in her that 
fearlessness and self-awareness which are exactly what we 
are seeking. So when the new songs came along, songs that 
could reveal nothing new in Mrs Klug since the old ones 
had done their duty so completely, and when these songs, 
without any justification at all, claimed one’s attention 
purely as songs, and when they in this way distracted one’s 
attention from Mrs. Klug but at the same time showed that 
she herself was not at ease in them either, part of the time 
making a failure of them and part of the time exaggeratmg 
her grimaces and gestures, one had to become annoyed and 
was consoled only by the fact that the memory of her per- 
fect performances in the past, resulting from her unshak- 
able integrity, was too firm to be disturbed by the present 
sight. 

January 7. Unfortunately Mrs. Tschissik always has 
parts which show only the essence of her character, she 
always plays women and girls who all at once are unhappy, 
despised, dishonored, wronged, but who are not allowed 
time to develop their characters in a natural sequence. The 
explosive, natural strength with which she plays these roles 
makes them climactic only when she acts them, in the play 



DIARIES 1912 ZI7 

'as it IS written, because of the wealth of acting they require, 
these rdles arp only suggestions, but this ifihows what she 
would be capable of. One of her important gestures begins 
fijS a shudder in her trfmbling hips, which she holds some- 
what stiffly Her little daughter seems to have one hip com- 
pletely stiff. When the actors embrace, they hold each 
other’s wigs in place. 

Recently, when I went up to Lowy’s room with him so 
that he could read me the letter he had written to the War- 
saw writer, Nombcrg, we met the Tschissik couple on the 
landing. They were carrying their costumes for Kol Nidre, 
wrapped in tissue paper like matzos, up to their room. 
We stopped for a little while. The railing supported my 
hands and the intonations of my sentences Her large 
mouth, so close in front of me, assumed surprising but natu- 
ral shapes It was my fault that the conversation threatened 
to end hopelessly, for in my effort hurriedly to express all 
my love and devotion I only remarked that the affaurs of 
the troupe were going wretchedly, that their repertoire 
was exhausted, that they could therefore not remain much 
longer and that the lack of interest that the Prague Jews 
took in them was incomprehensible. Monday I must— she 
•asked me— come to see Sedeinacht, although I already 
Icnow thS play. Then I shall hear her sing the song (“Hear, 
O Israel”) which, she remembers from a remark I qnce 
made, I love especially. 

“Yeshivahs” are talmudic colleges supported by many 
cbmmunities in Poland and Russia. The cost is not very 
great because these schools are usually housed in old, un- 
usable buildings in which, besides the rooms where the 
students study and sleep, is found the apartment of the 
Rosh Yeshivah, who iso performs other services in 



2i8 


FRANZ KAFKA 


the community, and of his assistant. The students pay no 
tuition and take their meals m turn with the various mem- 
bers of the community. Although these schools are based 
on the most severely orthodox principles, it is precisely in 
them that apostate progress has its source, since young 
people from distant places come together here, precisely 
the poor, the energetic and those who want to get away 
from their homes, since the supervision is not very strict 
and the young people are entirely thrown upon one an- 
other, and since the most essential part of the instruction is 
common study and mutual explanation of difficult passages; 
since the orthodoxy in the various home towns of the stu- 
dents IS always the same and therefore not much of a topic 
for conversation, while the suppressed progressive tenden- 
cies take the most varied forms, differing in strength 
according to the varying circumstances of the towns, so 
that there is always a lot to talk about, since, furthermore, 
one person always lays hands on only one or another copy 
of the forbidden progressive literature, while m the Yeshi- 
vah many such copies are brought together from every- 
where and exercise a particularly telling effect because 
every possessor of a copy propagates not only the text but 
also his own zeal— because of all these reasons and their 
immediate consequences, in the recent past all the" progres- 
sive writers, politicians, journalists and scholars have come 
out of these schools. The reputation of these schools among 
the orthodox has therefore deteriorated very much, while 
on the other hand young people of advanced inclinations 
stream to them more than ever. 

One famous Yeshivah is in Ostro. a small place eight 
hours by train from Warsaw. All Ostro is really only a 
bracket around a short stretch of the highway. Lowy in- 
sists it’s no longer than his stick. Once, when a count 



DIARIES 1912 219 

stopped m Ostro with his four-horse traveling carriage, 
the two lead horses stood outside one end 'fii the place and 
the rear of the carriage outside the other. 

^ Lowy decided, abo^t the age of fourteen when the con- 
straint of life at home became unbearable for him, to go to 
Ostro. His father had )ust slapped hun on the shoulder as 
he was leaving the klaus toward evening and had casually 
told him to see him later, he had something to discuss with 
him. Because he could Abviously expect nothing but the 
usual reproaches, Lowy went directly from the klaus to 
the railroad station, with no baggage, wearing a somewhat 
better caftan than usual because it was Saturday evening, 
and carrying all his money, which he always had with him. 
He took the ten o’clock train to Ostro where he arrived at 
seven the next morning. He went straight to the Yeshivah 
where he made no special stir, anyone can enter a Yeshivah, 
there are no special entrance requirements. The only strik- 
ing thing was his entering just at this time— it was summer— 
which was not customary, and the good caftan he was 
wearing. But all this was soon settled too, because Very 
young people such as these were, bound to each other by 
their Jewishness in a degree unknown to us, get to know 
each other easily. He distinguished himself in his studies, 
for he had acquired a good deal of knowledge at home. He 
liked talking to the strange boys, especially as, when they 
found out about his money, they all crowded around him 
offering to sell him things. One, who wanted to sell him 
“days,” astonished him especially. Free board was called 
“days.” They were a salable commodity because the mem- 
bers of the community, who wanted to perform a deed 
pleasing to God by providing free board for no matter 
what student, did not care who sat at their tables If a stu- 
dent was unusually clever, it was possible for him to pro- 



220 FRANZ KAFKA 

vide himself with two sets of free meals for one day. Ho 
could bear up under these double meals so much the better 
because they were not very ample, after the first meal, one 
could still swallow down the second with great pleasure, 
and because it might also happen that one day was doubly 
provided for while other days were empty. Nevertheless, 
everyone was happy, naturally, if he found an opportumty 
to sell such an additional set of free meals advantageously. 
Now if someone arrived in sumnier, as Lowy did, at a time 
when the free board had long since been distributed, the 
only possible way to get any was to buy it, as the additional 
sets of free meals which had been available at first had all 
been reserved by speculators 
The night in the Yeshivah was unbearable. Of course, 
all the windows were open since it was warm, but the 
stench and the heat would not stir out of the rooms, the 
students, who had no real beds, lay down to sleep without 
undressing, m their sweaty clothes, wherever they hap- 
pened to be sitting last. Everything was full of fleas In 
the* morning everyone hurriedly wet his hands and face 
with water and resumed his studies. Most of the time they 
studied together, usually two from one book. Debates 
would often draw a number into a circle. The Rosh Yeshi- 
vah explained only the most difficult passages here and 
there. Although Lowy later— he stayed in Ostro ten days, 
but slept and ate at the inn— found two like-minded friends 
(they didn’t find one another so easily, because they always 
first had carefully to test the opinions and reliability of the 
other person), he nevertheless was very glad to return 
home because he was accustomed to an orderly life and 
couldn’t stand the homesickness. 


In the large room there was the clamor of card playing 



DIARIES 1912 221 

and later the usual conversation which Father carries on 
when ho is well, as he is today, loudly if juot coherently. 
The words ^represented only small shapes in a formless 
clamor. Little Felix slept m the gurls’ room, the door of 
which was wide open I slept across the way, in my own 
room. The door of this room, in consideration of my age, 
was closed Besides, the open door indicated that they still 
wanted to lure Felix into the family while I was already 
excluded. * 

Yesterday at Baum’s Strobl was supposed to be there, 
but was at the theater. Baum read a column, “On the Folk- 
song”, bad Then a chapter from Des Schtcksals Sptele und 
Ernst; very good I was indifferent, in a bad mood, got no 
clear impression of the whole. On the way home in the rain 
Max told me the present plan of “Irma Polak ” I could not 
admit my mood, as Max never gives it proper recognition. 
I therefore had to be insincere, which finally spoiled every- 
thing for me I was so sorry for myself that I preferred to 
speak to Max when his face was in the dark, although liiine, 
in the light, could then betray itself more easily. But then 
the mysterious end of the novel gripped me in spite of all 
,the obstacles On the way home, after saying good night, 
tegret bttause of my falsity and pain because of its in- 
evitability Plan to start a special notebook on my relation- 
ship with Max. ’CVhat is not written down swims before 
one’s eyes and optical accidents determine the total im- 
pression. 

A 

When I lay on the sofa the loud talking in the room on 
either side of me, by the women on the left, by the men 
on the right, gave me the impression that they were coarse, 
savage beings who could not be appeased, who did not 



222 FRANZ KAFKA 

know what they were saying and spoke only in order to 
set the air in motion, who lifted their faces while> speaking 
and followed the spoken words with their eyes. 

So passes my rainy, quiet Sunday, I sit in my bedroom 
and am at peace, but instead of making up my mind to do 
some writing, into which I could have poured my whole 
being the day before yesterday, I have been staring at my 
fingers for quite a while. This week I think I have been 
completely influenced by Goethe, have really exhausted 
the strength of this influence and have therefore become 
useless. 

From a poem by Rosenfeid describing a storm at sea: 
“The souls flutter, the bodies tremble.” When he recites, 
Lbwy clenches the skin on his forehead and the bridge of 
his nose the way one would think only hands could be 
clenched. At the most gripping passages, which he wants 
to bring home to the listener, he himself comes close to us, 
or father he enlarges himself by making his appearance 
more distinct. He steps forward only a little, opens his eyes 
wide, plucks at his straight black coat with his absent- 
minded left hand and holds the right out to us, open and 
large. And we are supposed, even if we are not gripped, 
to acknowledge that he is gripped and to explain to him 
how the misfortune which has been described was possible. 

I am supposed to pose in the nude for the artist Ascher, 
as a model for a St. Sebastian. ’ 

If I should now, in the evening, return to my relatives, I 
shall, since I have written nothing that I could enjoy, not 
appear stranger, more despicable, more useless to them than 



DIARIES 1912 223 

I do to myself. All this, naturally, only in my feelings 
(which cannot be deceived even by the most precise ob- 
servation), fqr actually they all respect me and love me, 
too. 

) > 

January 24. Wednesday. For the following reasons have 
not written for so long. I was angry with my boss ahd 
cleared it up only by means of a good letter, was in the 
factory several times; Aad, and indeed greedily. Pines’ 
Uhistoire de la Lttterature Judeo-Allemande, 500 pages, 
with such thoroughness, haste and joy as I have never yet 
shown in the case of similar books, now I am readmg 
Fromer, Orgamsmus des Judentiims; finally I spent a lot of 
time with the Jewish actors, wrote letters for them, pre- 
vailed on the Zionist society to inquire of the Zionist 
societies of Bohemia whether they would like to have guest 
appearances of the troupe, I wrote the circular that was 
required and had it reproduced, saw Sulamith once more 
and Richter’s Herzele Mejtcbes for the first time, was at the 
folksong evening of the Bar Kokhba Society, and da^ be- 
fore yesterday saw Graf von Gletchen by Schmidtbonn. 

, Folksong evening' Dr. Nathan Bimbaum is the lecturer. 
Jewish habit of inserting “my dear ladies and gentlemen” 
or just “my dear” at every pause m the talk. Was repeated 
at the beginning of Birnbaum’s talk to the point of being 
ridiculous. But from what I know of Lowy I think that 
these recurrent expressions, which are frequently found in 
ofdinary Yiddish conversation too, such as “Weh 1st mir!” 
or “S’ist nischt,” or “S’lst viel zu reden,” are not intended 
to cover up embarrassment but are rather intended, like 
ever-fresh springs, to stir up the sluggish stream of speech 
that is never fluent enough for the Jewish temperament. 



FRANZ KAFKA 


224 

January 26 The back of Mr. Weltsch and the silence 
of the entire hall while listening to the bad poems. Birn- 
baum; His hair, worn somewhat longish, is cut off abruptly 
at his neck, hich is very erect either in itself or because of 
its sudden nudity. Large, crooked nose, not too narrow and 
yet with broad sides, which looks handsome chiefly because 
it^is in proper proportion to his large beard — Gollanm, the 
singer. Peaceful, sweetish, beatific, patronizing face turned 
to the side and down, prolonged smile somewhat sharpened 
by his wrinkled nose, which may be only part of his breath- 
ing technique. 

Pines Htstoire de la Litterature Judeo-Allei 7 iande. Paris 
1911. 

Soldiers’ song They cut off our beards and earlocks. 
And they forbid us to keep the Sabbath and holy days. 

Or: At the age of five I entered the “Heder” and now 
1 must ride a horse. 

Wos viir semen, semen vnr 
Ober jiiden semen vnr. 

[What we are, we are. 

But Jews we are ] 

Haskalah movement introduced by Mendelssohn at the 
beginning of the nineteenth century, adherents'are called 
Maskilim, are opposed to the popular Yiddish, tend toward 
Hebrew and the European sciences. Before the pogroms of 
1881 it was not nationalist, later strongly Zionist. Principle 
formulated by Gordon “Be a man on the street and a Jew 
at home.” To spread its ideas the Haskalah must use Yid- 
dish and, much as it hates the latter, lays the foundation 
of Its hterature. 

Other aims are “la lutte contre le chassidisme, I’exalta- 
tion de I’instruction et des travaux manuels.” 



DIARIES 1912 225 

^ Badchmi, the sad folk and wedding minstrel (Eliakum 
Zunser),>talmudic trend of thought. 

Le Roman ,populaire Eisik Meir Dick (1808-1894) in- 
structive, haskalic. Schomer, still worse, title, for example, 
“l!)er podriatechik (I’entrepreneur), em hochst mteres- 
santer Roman. Em nchtiger fach fun leben," or “Die ei- 
seme Frau oder das verkaufte Kind. Em wunderschoiter 
Roman.” Further, m America serial novels, “Zwischen 
Menschenfressern,” twehty-six volumes. 

S. J Abramowitsch (Mendele Mocher Sforim), lyric, 
subdued gaiety, confused arrangement. Fishke der Krum^ 
mer, Jewish habit of biting the lips. 

End of Haskalah 1881. New nationalism and democracy. 
Flourishing of Yiddish literature. 

S. Frug, lyric writer, life in the country by all means. 
DHicteux est le sojmteil du seigneur dans sa cbambre. Sur 
des oreillers doux, blancs conwie la neige. Mats plus d 6 - 
hcieux encore est le repos dans le champ sur du join frais 
d Pheure du soir, aprks le trcevatl. 

Talmud He who interrupts his study to say, ‘TIow 
beautiful is this tree,” deserves death. 

Lamentations at the west wall of the T emple. Poem ‘Ta 
ifille du Shammes ” The beloved rabbi is on his deathbed. 
Yhe burill of a shroud the size of the rabbi and other mys- 
tical measures are of no avail Therefore at night the elders 
of the congregation go from house to house with a list and 
collect from the members of the congregation renuncia- 
tions of days or weeks of their lives in favor of the rabbi. 
Deborah, la fille du Shammes, gives “the rest of her life.” 
She dies, the rabbi recovers At night, when he is studying 
alone m the synagogue, he hears the voice of Deborah s 
whole aborted life. The singmg at her wedding, her screams 
in childbed, her lullabies, the voice of her son studying the 



226 


FRANZ KAFKA 


Torah, the music at her daughter’s wedding. While the 
songs of lamentation sound over her corpse the rabbi, too, 
dies. 

Peretz: bad Heine lyrics and social poems. Ne 1851. 
Rosenfeld: The poor Yiddish public took up a collection 
to assure him of a livelihood 

•S. Rabinowitz (Sholom Aleichem), ne 1859. Custom of 
great jubilee celebrations in Yiddish hterature. Kasrilevke, 
Menachem Mendel, who emigrated and took his enture for- 
tune with him, although previously he had only studied 
Talmud, he begins to speculate in the stock market m the 
big city, comes to a new decision every day and always 
reports it to his wife with great self-satisfaction, until 
finally he must beg for traveling expenses. 

Peretz- The figure of the batlan frequent in the ghettos, 
lazy and grown clever through idling, lives in the circle of 
the pious and learned. Many marks of misfortune on them, 
as they are young people who, although they enjoy idle- 
ness, also waste away m it, hve in dreams, under the dom- 
inatibn of the unrestrained force of unappeased desires. 

Mttat neshika, death by a loss: reserved only for the most 
pious. 

Baal Shem Before he became a rabbi in Miedzyboz he 
lived in the Carpathians as a vegetable gardenti, later hfe 
was his brother-in-law’s coachman. His visions came to 
him on lonely walks. Zohar, “Bible of the Kabbalists.” 

Jewish theater. Frankfort Purim play, 1708. Ein schon 
neu Acbashverosh-spiel, Abraham Goldfaden, 1876-7 
Russo-Turkish War, Russian and Galician army contrac- 
tors had gathered in Bucharest, Goldfaden had also come 
there in search of a living, heard the crowds in the stores 
singing Yiddish songs and was encouraged to found a 
theater. He was not yet able to put women on the stage. 



DIARIES 1912 227 

Yiddish performances were forbidden in Russia 1883. They 
began in, London and New York 1884. 

J. Gordin 1897 in a jubilee publication of the Jewish 
theater in New York: The Yiddish theater has an audience 
01' hundreds of thousands, but it cannot expect to see a 
writer of great talent emerge as long as the majority of its 
authors are people hke me who have become dramatic au- 
thors only by chance, who write plays only by force of 
circumstance and remain isolated and see about them only 
ignorance, envy, enmity and spite. 

January 31. Wrote nothing Weltsch brings me books 
about Goethe that provoke in me a distracted excitement 
that can be put to no use. Plan for an essay, “Goethe’s 
Frightening Nature,” fear of the two hours’ walk which I 
have now begun to take in the evemng. 

February 4. Three days ago Wedekind. Erdgeist. Wede- 
kind and his wife, Tilly, act in it. Gear, precise voice of the 
woman Narrow, crescent-shaped face. The lower part of 
the leg branching off to the left when she stood quietly. 
The play clear even in retrospect, so that one goes home 
^peaceful and aware of oneself. Contradictory impression 
bf what AS thoroughly well established and yet remains 
strange. 

On my way to the theater I felt well. I savored my inner- 
most being as though it were honey. Drank it in an un- 
interrupted draught. In the theater this passed away at 
once. Orpheus in the Underworld with Pallenberg. The 
performance was so bad, applause and laughter around me 
in the standing-rooirt so great, that I could think of no way 
out but to run away after the second act and so silence 
itaU. 



228 


FRANZ KAFKA 


Day before yesterday wrote a good letter to Trautenau. 
about a guest appearance for Lowy. Each fresh reading of 
the letter calmed and strengthened me, theie was in it so 
much unspoken indication of everything good in me. 

.The zeal, permeating every part of me, with which I 
read about Goethe (Goethe’s conversations, student days, 
hours with Goethe, a visit of Goethe’s to Frankfort) and 
which keeps me from all writing. - 

S., merchant, thirty-five years old, member of no reli- 
gious community, educated m philosophy, interested in 
hterature for the most part only to the extent that it per- 
tains to his writing. Round head, black eyes, small, energetic 
mustache, firm flesh on his cheeks, thickset body. For 
years has been studying from mne to one o’clock at night. 
Bom in Stanislau, knows Hebrew and Yiddish. Married to 
a woman who gives the impression of being limited only 
because of the quite round shape of her face. 

For two days coolness toward Lowy. He asks me about 
it. I deny it. 

Quiet, restrained conversation with Miss T. ip. the bal- 
cony between the acts of Erdgeist. In order to achieve a 
good conversation one must, as it were, push one’s hand 
more deeply, more lightly, more drowsily under the sub- 
ject to be dealt with, then it can be lifted up astonishingly. 
Otherwise one breaks one’s fingers and thinks of nothing 
but one’s pains. 

Story: The evening walks, discovery of quick walking. 
Introduction, a beaut^ul, dark room. 



DIARIES 1912 229 

' Miss T. told me atiout a scene in her new story where a 
gurl with a bad reputation enters the sewing school. The 
impression on the other gurls. I«say that they, who feel 
clearly m themselves l}ie capaaty and desu-e to earn a bad 
reputation and who at the same time are able to see for 
themselves at first hand the kind of misfortune into which 
one hurls oneself by it, will pity her. ' 

A week ago a lecture in the banquet room of the Jewish 
Town Hall by Dr. Theilhaber on the dechne of the Ger- 
man Jews. It IS unavoidable, for (i) if the Jews collect in 
the cities, the Jewish communities in the country disappear. 
The pursuit of profit devours them. Marriages are made 
only with regard to the bnde’s settlement. Two-child sys- 
tem. (2) Mixed marriages (3) Conversion. 

Amusing scene when Prof Ehrenfels,*^ who grows more 
and more handsome and who— with his bald head sharply 
outlined against the light in a curve that is puffed out at the 
top, his hands pressed together, with his full voice, which 
he modulates like a musical instrument, and a confident 
smile at the mectinsr— declares himself in favor of mixed 
races. 

1 

’ February 5. Monday. Weary even of reading Dichtung 
und Wahrheit. I am hard on the outside, cold on the inside. 
Today, when I came to Dr. F., although we approached 
each other slowly and deliberately, it was as though we had 
collided like balls that drive one another back and, them- 
selves out of control, get lost. I asked him whether he was 
tired. He was not tired, why did I ask!’ I am tired, I re- 
plied, and sat down. 


To lift yourself out of such a mood, even if you have to 



FKANZ KAFKA 


230 

do it by strength of will, should be easy. I force myself out- 
of my chair, circle the table in long strides, exercise my 
head and neck, make my eyes sparkle, tighten the muscles 
around them. Defy my own feelings, welcome Lowy en- 
thusiastically supposing he comes to see me, amiably tol- 
erate my sister m the room while I write, swallow all that 
is skid at Max’s, whatever pam and trouble it may cost me, 
in long draughts. Yet even if I manage fairly well in some 
of this, one obvious shp, and slips cannot be avoided, will 
stop the whole process, the easy and the difficult alike, and 
I wdl have to turn backward in the circle. So the best re- 
source is to meet everything as calmly as possible, to make 
yourself an inert mass, and, if you feel that you are carried 
away, not to let yourself be lured into taking a single un- 
necessary step, to stare at others with the eyes of an animal, 
to feel no compunction, to yield to the non-conscious that 
you beheve far away while it is precisely what is burning 
you, with your own hand to throttle down whatever 
ghostly life remains in you, that is, to enlarge the final 
peac6 of the graveyard and let nothing survive save that. 
A characteristic movement in such a condition is to run 
your little finger along your eyebrows.^® 

Short spell of faintness yesterday in the Cafe«City with 
Lowy. How I bent down over a newspaper to hide it. 

Goethe’s beautiful silhouette. Simultaneous impression 
of repugnance when looking at this perfect human body, 
since to surpass this degree of perfection is unimaginable 
and yet it looks only as though it had been put together by 
accident. The erect posture, die dangling arms, the slender 
throat, the bend in the knees. 



DIARIES 1912 231 

' My impatience and grief because of my exhaustion axe 
nourished especially on the prospect of the future that is 
thus prepared for me and which is never out of my sight. 
What evenings, walk^ despair in bed and on the sofa (Feb- 
ruary 7) are still before me, worse than those I have already 
endured! 

Yesterday in the factory. The gurls, in their unbearably 
dirty and untidy clothes, their hair disheveled as though 
they had just got up, the expressions on their faces fixed by 
the incessant noise of the transmission belts and by the 
individual machines, automatic ones, of course, but un- 
predictably breaking down, they aren’t people, you don’t 
greet them, you don’t apologize when you bump into them, 
if you call them over to do something, they do it but return 
to their machine at once, with a nod of the head you show 
them what to do, they stand there in petticoats, they are at 
the mercy of the pettiest power apd haven’t enough calm 
understanding to recognize this power and placate it by a 
glance, a bow. But when six o’clock comes and they call it 
out to one another, when they untie the kerchiefs from 
around their throats and their hair, dust themselves with a 
^brush that passes around and is constantly called for by the 
impatient? when they pull their skirts on over their heads 
and clean their hjnds as well as they can— then at last they 
are women again, despite pallor and bad teeth they can 
smile, shake theur stiff bodies, you can no longer bump into 
them, stare at them or overlook them, you move back 
against the greasy crates to make room for them, hold your 
hat in your hand when they say good evening, and do not 
know how to behave when one of them holds your winter 
coat for you to put on. 



FRANZ KAFKA 


232 

February 8 Goethe: My delight in creating was infinite. 

I have become more ntrvous, weaker, and have lost a 
large part of the calm on which I prided myself years ago. 
Today, when I received the card from Baum in winch he 
writes that he cannot give the talk at the evening for the 
Eabem Jews after all, and when I was therefore compelled 
to think that I should have to take it over, I was over- 
powered by uncontrollable twitchings, the pulsing of my 
arteries sprang along my body like little flames, if I sat 
down, my knees trembled under the table and I had to press 
my hands together. I shall, of course, give a good lecture, 
that is certain, besides, the restlessness itself, heightened to 
an extreme on that evening, will pull me together in such 
a way that there will not be room for restlessness and the 
talk will come straight out of me as though out of a gun 
barrel. But it is possible that I shall collapse after it, in any 
event I shall not be able to get over it for a long time So 
little physical strength! Even these few words are written 
under the influence of weakness. 

Yesterday evening with Lowy at Baum’s. My liveliness. 
Recently Lowy translated a bad Hebrew story, “The Eye,” 
at Baum’s. 

February 13. I am beginning to write the lecture for 
Lowy’s performance. It is on Sunday, the i8th. I shall not 
have much time to prepare and am really striking up a kind 
of recitative here as though in an opera. The reason is only 
that an incessant excitement has been oppressing me for 
days and that, somewhat hesitant in the face of the actual 
beginning of the lecture, I want to write down a few words 
only for myself; in that way, given a little momentum, I 
shall be able to stand up before the audience. Cold and heat 



DIARIES 1912 233 

• alternate in me wiA the successive words of the sentence, 
I dream melodic rises and falls, I read sentences of Goethe’s 
as though my whole body were /unmng down the stresses. 

1 , 

” February 25. Hold fast to die diary from today on! 

Write regularly! Don’t surrender! Even if no salvation 
should come, I want to be worthy of it at every moment. 
I spent this evening at the family table in complete indiffer- 
ence, my right hand on' the arm of the chair in which my 
sister sat playing cards, my left hand weak in my lap. From 
time to time I tried to realize my unhappiness, I barely 
succeeded. 

I have written nothing for so long because of having 
arranged an evening for Lowy in the banquet room of the 
Jewish Town Hall on February i8th, at which I delivered 
a little introductoiy lecture on Yiddish For two weeks I 
worried for fear that I could not produce the lecture On 
the evening before the lecture I suddenly succeeded. 

Preparations for the lecture Conferences with the Bar 
Kokhba Society, getting up the program, tickets, hall, 
numbering the seats, key to the piano (Toynbee Hall), 
setting up the stage, pianist, costumes, selling tickets, news- 
,paper notices, censorship by the police and the religious 
communi^. 

Places in which I was and people with whom I spoke or 
to whom I wrote In general With Max, with Schmerler, 
who visited me, with Baum, who at first assumed the re- 
sponsibility for the lecture but then refused it, whose mind 
Ithanged again in the course of an evemng devoted to that 
purpose and who the next day again notified me of his 
refusal by special delivery, with Dr. Hugo Hermann and 
Leo Hermann in the Cafe Arco, often with Robert W eltsch 
at his home, about selling tickets with Dr. Bl. (in vain). Dr. 



FRANZ KAFKA 


*34 

H., Dr. FI., visit to Miss T., lecture at Afike Jehuda (by 
Rabb. Ehrentreu on Jeremiah and his tune, dm’mg the 
social part of the eveningtthat followed, a short, abortive 
talk about Lowy), at the teacher W-’s place (then in the 
Cafe, then for a walk, from twelve to one he stood in front 
of my door as large as life and would not let me go in). 
About the hall, at Dr. Karl B.’s, twice at L.’s house on 
Heuwagsplatz, several times at Otto Pick’s, in the bank, 
about the key to the piano for the Toynbee lecture, with 
Mr. R. and the teacher St., then to the latter’s home to get 
the key and to return it, about the stage, with the custodian 
and the porter of the town hall, about payment, in the 
town hall office (twice), about the sale, with Mrs. Fr. at 
the exposition, “The Set Table.” Wrote to Miss T , to one 
Otto Kl. (in vain), for the Tagblatt (in vain), to Lowy (“I 
won’t be able to give the talk, save me' ”) . 

Excitements. About the lecture, one night twisted up in 
bed, hot and sleepless, hatred of Dr. B., fear of Weltsch (he 
will not be able to sell anything), Afike Jehuda, the notices 
are not published in the papers the way in which they were 
expected to be, distraction in the office, the stage does not 
come, not enough tickets are sold, the color of the tickets 
upsets me, the lecture has to be interrupted because thc 
pianist forgot his music at home in Kosir, a great deal of 
indifference toward Lowy, almost disgust. 

Benefits: Joy in Lowy and confidence in him, proud, un- 
earthly consciousness durmg my lecture (coolness m the 
presence of the audience, only the lack of practice kept me 
from using enthusiastic gestures freely), strong voice, 
eflfortless memory, recognition, but above all the power 
with which I loudly, decisively, determinedly, faultlessly, 
irresistibly, with clear eyes, almost casually, put down the 



DIARIES 1912 235 

'impudence of the tliree town hall porters and gave them, 
instead of the twelve kronen they demanded, only six 
kronen, and even these with a g^and air. In all this are re- 
vealed powers to wh^ch I would gladly entrust myself if 
they would remain. (My parents were not there.) 

Also; Academy of the Herder Association on the Soph- 
ien Island. Bie shoves his hand in his trouser pocket at the 
beginning of the lecture. This face, satisfied despite all 
disappointment, of people who work as they please. Hof- 
mannsthal reads with a false rmg in his voice. A close-knit 
figure, beginning with the ears pressed close to his head. 
Wiesenthal. The beautiful parts of the dance, for example, 
when in sinking to the ground the natural heaviness of the 
body IS revealed. 

Impression of Toynbee Hall. 

Zionist meeting. Blumenfeld. Secretary of the World 
Zionist Orgamzation. 

A new stabilizing force has recently appeared in my 
deliberations about myself which I can recognize now for 
die first tdne and only now, since during the last week I 
have been literally disintegrating because of sadness and 
uselessness. 

Changing emotions among the young people in the Caf6 
Alco. 

February 26. Better consciousness of myself. The beat- 
ing of my heart more as I would wish it. The hissing of the 
gaslight above me. 



FRANZ KAFKA 


236 

I opened the front door to see whether the weather 
would tempt me to take a walk. The blue sky could not be 
denied, but large gray clcuds through which the blue shim- 
mered, with flap-shaped, curved edjges, hovered low, one 
could see them against the nearby wooded hills. Neverthe- 
less the street was full of people out for a walk. Baby 
carriages were guided by the firm hands of mothers. Here 
and there in the crowd a vehicle came to a stop until the 
people made way for the prancing horses Meanwhile the 
driver, quietly holding the quivering reins, looked ahead, 
missed no details, examined everything several times and 
at the right moment set the carriage in motion. Children 
were able to run about, little room as there was. Girls in 
light clothes with hats as emphatically colored as postage 
stamps walked arm in arm with young men and a song, sup- 
pressed in their throats, revealed itself in their dancing pace. 
Families stayed close together, and even if sometimes they 
were shaken out into a single file, there were still arms 
stretched back, hands waving, pet names called, to join to- 
gether those who had strayed. Men who had no part in this 
tried to shut themselves off even more by sticking their 
hands in their pockets. That was petty nonsense First I 
stood in the doorway, then I leaned against the doorpost m 
order to look on more comfortably. Clothes brushed 
against me, once I seized a ribbon that ornamented the back 
of a girl’s skirt and let her draw it out of my hand as she 
walked away, once, when I stroked the shoulder of a girl, 
just to flatter her, the passer-by behind her struck me over 
the fingers. But I pulled him behind the bolted half of the 
door, I reproached him with raised hands, with looks out 
of the comers of my eyes, a step toward him, a step away 
from him, he was happy when I let go of him with a shove. 
From then on, naturally, I often called people to me, a 



DIARIES 1912 237 

prook of my finger j was enough, or a quick, unhesitating 
glance. 

How sleepily and without effort I wrote this useless, un- 
fimshed thmg. 

Today I am writing to Lowy. I am copying down the let- 
ters to him here because I hope to do something with them: 

Dear friend— 

February 27 . 1 have no time to write letters in duplicate. 

Yesterday evening, at ten o’clock, I was walking at my 
sad pace down the Zeltnergasse. Near the Hess hat store a 
young man stops three steps in front of me, so forces me to 
stop too, removes his hat and then runs at me. In my first 
fright I step back, think at first that someone wants to know 
how to get to the station, but why in this way^ — then think, 
since he approaches me confidentially and looks up into my 
face because I am taller Perhaps hd wants money, or some- 
thing worse. My confused attention and his confused speech 
mingle. 

“You’re a lawyer, aren’t you’ A doctor’ Please, couldn’t 
you give me some advice’ I have a case here for which I 
reed a lawyer.” 

Because of caution, general suspicion and fear that I might 
make a fool of mj^self, I deny that I am a lawyer, but am 
ready to advise him, what is it’ He begins to talk, it interests 
me, to increase my confidence I ask him to talk while we 
walk, he wants to go my way, no, I would rather go with 
him, I have no place in particular to go. 

He is a good reciter, he was not nearly as good in the past 
as he is now, now he can already imitate Kainz so that no 
one can tell the difference. People may say he only imitates 



FRANZ KAFKA 


238 

him, but he puts ui a lot of his own tCiO. He is short, to be 
sure, but he has mimiciy, memor}% presence, everything, 
everything. Duiing his mihtary service out there in Aldo- 
witz, m camp, he recited, a comrade sang, dr.ey really had 
a very good time. It was a beautiful ‘Cime. He prefers to re- 
cite Dehmel most of all, the passionate, frivolous poems, for 
instance, about the bride who pictures her bridal night to 
herself, when he recites that it makes a huge impression, 
especially on the girls. Well, that '.s really obvious He has 
Dehmel very beautifully bound m red leather. (He de- 
scribes It with dropping gestures of his hands.) But the bind- 
ing really doesn’t matter. Aside from this he likes very much 
to recite Rideamus. No, they don’t clash with one another 
at all, he sees to it that there’s a transition, talks betw'een 
them, whatever occurs to him, makes a fool of the public. 
Then “Prometheus” is on his program too. There he isn’t 
afraid of anyone, not even of Moissi, .Moissi drmks, he 
doesn’t. Finally, he likes very much to read from Swet Mar- 
ten, he’s a new Scandmavian writer. Very good. It’s sort of 
epigrams and short sayings. Those about Napoleon, espe- 
cially, are excellent, but so are all the others about other 
great men. No, he can’t recite any of this yet, he hasn’t 
learned it yet, not even read it all, but his aunt read it to him 
recently and he liked it so much. „ 

So he wanted to appear in public with this program and 
therefore offered himself to the Women’s Progress for an 
evening’s appearance. Really, at first he wanted to present 
Eine Gutsgeschichte by Lagerlof, and had even lent this 
story to the chairwoman of the Women’s Progress, Mrs. 
Dur^ge-Wodnanski, to look over. She said the story was 
beautiful, of course, but too long to be read. He saw that, it 
was really too long, especially as, according to the plan of 
the evening, his brother was supposed to play the piano too. 



DIAKIES 1912 239 

This brother, t\vent)'-one years old, a verj' lovely boy, is a 
virtuoso^he was at the music college in Berhn for two years 
(four years ago, now) . But camf^ home quite spoiled. Not 
really spoiled, but the, woman with whom he boarded fell 
in’love \nth him. Later he said that he was often too tired 
to play because he had to keep ridmg around on this 
boardinw-baw. 

So, since the Gtitsgeschickte wouldn’t do, they agreed on 
the other program Delimel, Rideamus. “Prometheus" and 
Swet Marten. But now, in order to show Mrs.Duregeinad- 
vance the sort of person he really was, he brought her the 
manuscript of an essay, “The Joy of Life,” which he had 
MTitten this summer. He wrote it in a summer resort. ■wtoIb 
it in shorthand during the day, in the evemng made a clean 
copy, polished, crossed out, but really it wasn’t much work 
because it came off at once. He’ll lend it to me if I like, i^s 
written in a popular stjde, of course, on purpose, but there 
are good ideas in it and it is betojtn, as tfiev* say. (Pointed 
laughter with chin raised.) I may leaf through it here under 
the electric hght. (It is an appeal to youth not to be sad. for 
after all there is nature, freedom, Goethe. Schiller, Shake- 
speare, flowers, insects, etc.) The Durege woman said die 
really didn’t have time to read it just then, but he could 
lend it to her, she would return it in a few da\'s. He sus- 
pected something even then and didn’t want to leave ic 
there, evaded, said, for instance, “Look, Mrs Durege, why 
should I leave it here, it’s really just ordinary, it’s well writ- 
ten, of course, but. . . .” None of it did any good, he had to 
le’ave it there. This was on Friday. 

(February 28.) Sunday morning, while washing, it oc- 
curs to him that he hadn’t seen the T agblatt yet. He opens 
it by chance just at the first page of the magazine section. 
The tide of the first essay, “The Child as Creator, strikes 



FRANZ KAFKA 


240 

him. He reads the first few hnes— andf begins to cry with 
joy. It is his essay, word for word his essay. So for the first 
time he is in prm't, he run? to his mother and tells her. What 
joy' The old woman, she has diabetes and is divorced from 
his father, who, by the way, is in the right, is so proud. One 
son IS already a vurtuoso, now the other is becoming an au- 
thor! . 

After the first excitement he thinks the matter over. How 
did the essay get into the paper-* Without his consent!* 
Without the name of the author!* Without his being paid 
a fee!* This is really a breach of faith, a fraud. This Mrs. 
Durege is really a devil. And women have no souls, says 
Mohamet (often repeated). It’s really easy to see how the 
plagiarism came about Here was a beautiful essay, it’s not 
easy to come across one hke it. So Mrs. D. therefore went 
to the Tagblatt, sat down with one of the editors, both of 
them overjoyed, and now they began to rewrite it. Of 
course, it had to be rewritten, for in the first place the plagi- 
arism should not be obvious at first sight and in the second 
place the thirty-two-page essay was too long for the paper. 

In reply to my question whether he would not show me 
passages which correspond, because that would interest me 
especially and because only then could I advise him what to 
do, he begins to read his essay, turns to another pa'Ssage, leafs 
through it without finding anything, and finally says that 
everything was copied. Here, for instance, the paper says: 
The soul of the child is an unwritten page, and “unwritten 
page” occurs in his essay too. Or the expression “surnamed” 
is copied too, because how else could they hit up6n 
“surnamed.” But he can’t compare individual passages. Of 
course, everything was copied, but in a disguised way, in a 
different sequence, abridged and with small, foreign inter- 
polations. 



DIARIES 1912 241 

> I read aloud a f eV of the more striking passages from the 
paper. Is^tliat in the essay? No. This? No. Tins? No. Yes, 
but these are )bst the interpolated passagcij. In its spirit, the 
whole thing, the whole thing, is copied. But provmg it, I 
arh afraid, will be difficult. He’ll prove it, all right, with the 
help of a clever lawyer, that’s what lawyers are for, after 
all. (He looks forward to this proof as an entirely new task, 
completely separate from this affair, and is proud of his 
confidence that he will Be able to accomplish it.) 

That it IS his essay, moreover, can be seen from the very 
fact that It was printed withm two days. Usually it takes six 
weeks at the very least before a piece that is accepted is 
printed. But here speed was necessary, of course, so that he 
would not be able to interfere. That’s why two days were 
enough. 

Besides, the newspaper essay is called “The Child as Cre- 
awr.’’ That clearly refers to him, and besides, it is sarcasm. 
By “child” they really mean him, because he used to be 
regarded as a “child,” as “dumb” (he really was so only dur- 
ing his military service, he served a year and a half), and 
they now mean to say with this title that he, a child, had 
accomplished something as good as this essay, that he had 
therefore proved himself as a creator, but at the same time 
remained dumb and a child in that he let himself be cheated 
like this. The child who is referred to in the original essay 
is a cousin from the country who is at present hving with 
his mother. 

But the plagiarism is proved especially convincingly by a 
circumstance which he hit upon only after a considerable 
amount of deliberation' “The Child as Creator” is on the 
first page of the magazine section, but on the third there is 
a little story by a certain “Feldstein” woman. The name is 
obviously a pseudonym. Now one needn’t read all of this 



FRANZ KAFKA 


242 

Story, a glance at the first few lines is Inough to show one 
immediately that this is an unashamed imitation of Lager- 
lof. The whole 'story makes it even clearer. What does 
this mean!* This means that this Feldstein, or whatever her 
name is, is the Durege woman’s tool, that she read the 
Qutsgeschtchte, brought by him to the Durege woman, at 
her house, that in writing this story, she made use of what 
she had read and that therefore both women are exploitmg 
him, one on the first page of the ma'gazine section, the other 
on the third page. Naturally anyone can read and imitate 
Lagerlof on his own initiative but in this case, after all, his 
influence is too apparent. (He keeps waving the page back 
and forth.) 

Monday noon, right after the bank closed, he naturally 
went to see Mrs. Efurege. She opens her door only a crack, 
she is very nervous “But, Mr. Reichmann, why have you 
come at noon^ My husband is asleep. I can’t let you in 
now.”— “Mrs. Durege, you must let me in by all means. It’s 
about an important matter ” She sees I am in earnest and lets 
me cdme m. Her husband, of course, was definitely not at 
home. In the next room I see my manuscript on the table 
and this immediately starts me thinking. “Mrs. Durege, what 
have you done with my manuscript. Without my consent 
you gave it to the T agblatt. How much did they <pay you^* ” 
She trembles, she knows nothing, has no idea how it could 
have gotten into the paper, “^accuse, Mrs. Dur^e,” I said, 
half jokingly, but stUl in such a way that she sees what I 
really mean, and I keep repeating this “/’flccwre, Mrs. Du- 
rege” all the time I am there so that she can take note of it, 
and when I go I even say it several times at the door. Indeed, 
I understand her nervousness well. If I make it public or sue 
her, her position would really be impossible, she would have 
to leave the Women’s Progress, etc. 



DIARIES 1912 243 

I <> 

From her house I go straight to the office of the Tagblatt 
and havc’the editor, Low, fetched. He comes out quite pale, 
naturally, is hardly able to walk-l^everthefess I do not want 
to begin with my bu-jiness at once and I want to test him 
first too. So I ask him- “Mr. Low, are you a Zionist?” (For 
I know he used to be a Zionist.) “No,” he says. I know 
enough, he must be acting a part in front of me. Now Iksk 
about the essay. Once mpre mcoherent talk. He knows noth- 
ing, has nothing to do with the magazine section, will, if I 
wish, get the editor who is in charge of it. “Mr. Wittmann, 
come here,” he calls, and is happy that he can leave. Witt- 
mann comes, also very pale. I ask: “Are you the editor of 
the magazine section’” He. “Yes.” I just say, “y accuse” 
and leave. 

In the bank I immediately telephone Bohemia. I want to 
give them tlie story for pubhcation. But I can’t get a good 
cohnection. Do you know why’ The office of the T agblatt 
is pretty close to the telephone exchange, so from the Tag- 
blatt it’s easy for them to control the connections as they 
please, to hold them up or put them through. And as a mat- 
ter of fact, I keep hearing indistinct whispering voices on 
the telephone, obviously the editors of the Tagblatt. They 
Vave, of course, a good deal of mterest in not letting this call 
go throug'Ji. Then I hear (naturally very indistinctly ). some 
of them persuading the operator not to put the call throngh, 
while others are already connected with Bohemia and are 
trying to keep them from listening to my story. “Opera- 
tor,” I shout into the telephone, “if you don’t put this call 
through at once. I’ll complain to the management.” My col- 
leagues all around me in the bank laugh when they hear me 
talking to the telephone operator so violently. Finally I get 
my party. “Let me talk to Editor Kisch. I have an extremely 
important piece of news for Bohemia. If you don’t take it. 



FRANZ KAFKA 


244 

I’ll give It to another paper at once. It’s high time.” But smce 
Kisch IS not there I hang up without revealing anything. 

In the evening! go to the office of Bohemia and have the 
editor, Kisch, called out. I tell him the story but he doesn’t 
want to publish it. Bohemia, he says, can’t do anythmg li£e 
that, it would cause a scandal and we can’t risk it because 
we're dependent. Hand it over to a lawyer, that would be 
best. 

On my way from the Bohemia office I met you and so I 
am asking your advice. 

“I advise you to settle the matter in a friendly way.” 

“Indeed, I was thinking myself that would be best. She’s 
a woman, after all. Women have no souls, says Mohamet, 
with good reason. To forgive would be more humane, too, 
more Goethe-like.” 

“Certainly. And then you wouldn’t have to give up the 
recitation evening, either, which would otherwise be lost, 
after all.” 

“But what should I do now^” 

“Go to them tomorrow and say that this one time you 
are willing to assume it was unconscious influence.” 

“That’s very good. That’s just what I’ll do.” 

“But because of this you needn’t give up your revenge, 
either. Simply have the essay published somewhe'fe else and 
then send it to Mrs. Dur^ge with a nice dedication.” 

“That will be the best punishment. I’ll have it published 
in the Deutsches Abendblatt. They’ll take it; I’m not wor- 
ried about that. I’ll just not ask for any payment.” 

Then we speak about his talent as an actor, I am of tHe 
opinion that he should really have training. “Yes, you’re 
right about that. But where^ Do you perhaps know where 
it can be studied!"” I say: “That’s difficult. I really don’t 
know.” He: “That doesn’t really matter. I’ll ask Kisch. 



DIARIES I9IZ 245 

‘He’s a journalist an^ has a lot of connections. He’ll be able 
to give ipe good advice. I’ll just telephone him, spare him 
and myself thfc trip and get all the information.” 

“And about Mrs.^Durege, you’ll do what I advised 
ybu to’” 

“Yes, but I forgot; what did you advise me to do’” I re- 
peat my advice. •* 

“Good, that’s what I’ll do.” He turns into the Cafe Corso, 
I go home, having experienced how refreshing it is to speak 
with a perfect fool. I hardly laughed, but was just thor- 
oughly awakened. 

The melancholy “formerly,” used only on business 
plaques. 

March 2. Who is to confirm for me the truth or probabil- 
ity of this, that it is only because of my literary mission that 
I am uninterested in all other things and therefore heartless, 

March 3. February 28 th to hear Moissi. Unnatural spec- 
tacle. He sits in apparent calm, whenever possible keeps his 
folded hands between his knees, his eyes on the book lying 
before him and lets his voice pass over us with the breath of 
a runner. 

The hall’s good acoustics. Not a word is lost, nor is there 
the whisper of an echo, instead everything grows gradually 
larger, as though the voice, already occupied with some- 
thing else, continued to exercise a direct aftereffect, it grows 
sfronger after the initial impetus and swallows us up. The 
possibilities one sees here for one’s own voice. Just as the 
hall works to the advantage of Moissi’s voice, his voice 
works to the advantage of ours. Unashamed tricks and sur- 
prises at which one must look down at the floor and which 



FRANZ KAFKA 


246 

one would never use oneself, singing individual verses 
at the very beginning, for instance, “Sleep, Miriam, my 
child”, wandering around of the voice in the melody; 
rapid utterance of the May song, it snems as if only the tip 
of the tongue were stuck between the words, dividing the 
phrase “November wmd” in order to push the “wind” 
down and then let it whistle upward. If one looks up at the 
ceiling of the hall, one is drawn upward by the verses. 

Goethe’s poems unattainable for the reciter, but one can- 
not for that reason find fault with this recitation, for each 
poem moves toward the goal. Great effect later, when in 
reciting the encore, Shakespeare’s “Rain Song,” he stood 
erect, was free of the text, pulled at his handkerchief and 
then crushed it in his hands, and his eyes sparkled. Round 
cheeks and yet an angular face. Soft hair, stroked over and 
over again with soft movements of his hand. The enthusi- 
astic reviews that one has read are a help to him, in our 
opinion, only until the first hearing, then he becomes en- 
tangled in them and cannot produce a pure impression. 

This sort of reciting from a chair, with the book before 
one, reminds one a little of ventriloquism. The artist, seem- 
ingly not participating, sits there like us, in his bowed face 
we see only the mouth move from time to time, apd insteacf 
of reading the verses himself, he lets them be read over his 
head. Despite the fact that so many melodies were to be 
heard, that the voice seemed as controlled as a light boat 
in the water, the melody of the verses could really not be 
heard Many words were dissolved by the voice, they were 
taken hold of so gently that they shot up into the air and 
had nothing more to do with the human voice until, out of 
sheer necessity, the voice spoke some sharp consonant or 
other, brought the word back to earth and completed it. 



DIARIES I9IZ 247 

> Later, a walk with Ottla, Miss Taussig, the Baum couple 
and Pick, the Elizabeth Bridge, the Quai, the Kleinscite, Ae 
Radetzky Caie, the Stone Bridge, Karlsgasse. I still saw the 
prospect of a? good mood, so that’really there was not much 
fault to find with me. 


March 5. These revolting doctors! Businesslike, d^er- 
mined and so ignorant of healing that, if this businesslike 
determination were to leave them, they would stand at sick- , 


beds like schoolboys. I wished I had the strength to found 
a nature-cure society. By scratching around m my sister’s 


ear Dr. K. turns an inflammation of the eardrum into an in- 


flammation of the inner ear, the maid collapses while fixing 
the fire, with the quick diagnosis which is his custom in the 
case of maids, the doctor declares it to be an upset stomach 
and a resulting congestion of blood, the next day she takes 
tqher bed again, has a high fever, the doctor turns her from 
side to side, aflirms it is angina, and runs away so that the 
next moment will not refute him. Even dares to speak of the 
“vulgarly violent reaction of this girl,” which is true’ to this 
extent, that he is used to people whose physical condition is 
worthy of his curative power and is produced by it, and he 
, feels insulted, more than he is aware, by the strong nature 
of this coantry girl. 


Yesterday at Bfaum’s. Read Der Damon. Total impression 
unfriendly. Good, precise mood on the way up to Baum’s, 
died down immediately I got up there, embarrassment in 
the presence of the child. 


Sunday: In the Continental, at the cardplayers’. Journor- 
listen with Kramer first, one and a half acts. A good deal of 
forced merriment can be seen in Bolz, which produces, in- 



FRANZ KAFKA 


248 

deed, a little that is really dehcate. Met MissTaussig in front 
of the theater in the intermission after the second act. Ran 
to the checkrooHi, returned with cloak flymg and escorted 
her home. 

March 8. Day before yesterday was blamed because of 
the'factory. Then for an hour on the sofa thought about 
jumping-out-of-the-window. 

Yesterday, Harden lecture on“TheTheater.” Apparently 
entirely impromptu, I was in a fairly good mood and there- 
fore did not find it as empty as did the others. Began well: 
“At this hour in which we have met together here to discuss 
the theater, the curtain is rismg m every theater of Europe 
and the other comments to reveal the stage to the audience.” 
With an electric light attached to a stand in front of him at 
the level of his breast so that it can be moved about, he lights 
up the front of his shirt as though it were on display, and 
during the course of the lecture he changes the lighting by 
moving the light Toe dancing to make himself taller, as 
well as to tighten up his talent for improvisation Trousers 
tightevenaroundthegroin. A short tail coat like that tacked 
onto a doll. Almost strained, serious face, sometimes like an 
old lady’s, sometimes hke Napoleon’s. Fading color of his 
forehead as of a wig. Probably corseted. 

Read through some old notebooks. It takes all my strength 
to last it out. The unhappiness one must suffer when one in- 
terrupts oneself in a task that can never succeed except ail 
at once, and this is what has always happened to me until 
now; in rereading one must re-experience this unhappiness 
in a more concentrated way though not as strongly as be- 
fore. 



DIARIES 1912 249 

’ Today, while bathing,- 1 thought I felt old powers, as 
though they had been untouched by the long interval. 

March 10 . ’Sunday, ^e seduced a girl in a small place in 
the Iser mountains where he spent a summer to restore his 
dehcate lungs. After a brief effort to persuade her, incom- 
prehensibly, the Avay lung cases sometimes act, he threw the 
girl— his landlord’s daughter, who liked to walk with him in 
the evening after work— down m the grass on the river bank ' 
and took her as she lay there unconscious with fright. Later 
he had to carry water from the river in his cupped hands 
and pour it over the girl’s face to restore her. “Julie, but 
Juhe,” he said countless times, bending over her. He was 
ready to accept complete responsibihty for his offense and 
was only making an effort to make himself realize how seri- 
ous his situation was. Without thinking about it he could 
not have realized it. The simple gurl who lay before him, 
now breathing regularly again, her eyes still closed because 
of fear and embarrassment, could make no difBculjy for 
him, with the tip of his toe, he, the great, strong person, 
could push the girl aside. She was weak and plain, could 
what had happened to her have any significance that would 
18st even ijntil tomorrow^ Would not anyone who com- 
pared the two of them have to come to this conclusion^ The 
river stretched catimly between the meadows and fields to 
the distant hills. There was still sunshine only on the slope 
of the opposite shore. The last clouds were drifting out of 
the clear evening sky. 

Nothing, nothing. This is the way I raise up ghosts before 
me. I viias involved, even if only superficially, only in the 
passage, “Later he had. . . .” mostly in the “pour.” For a mo- 



FRANZ KAFKA 


250 

ment I thought I saw something real ni the description of 
the landscape. 

So deserted by myself, by everytl^ing. Noise in the next 
room. 

Mar9h 1 1. Yesterday unendurable. Why doesn’t every- 
one join in the evenmg meal^ That would really be so 
beautiful. 

The reciter, Reichmann, landed in the insane asylum the 
day after our conversation. 

Today burned many old, disgusting papers. 

W., Baron von Biedermann, Gesprache mit Goethe. The 
way the daughters of the Leipzig copperplate-engrav?r. 
Stock, comb his hair, 1767. 

The way, in 1772, Kestner found him lying in the grass 
inGarbenheim and the way he “was conversing with several 
people who were standing around, an Epicurean philoso- 
pher (v. Gone, a great genius), a Stoic philosopher (v. Kiel- 
mansegg) and a cross between the two (Dr. Komg), and 
he really enjoyed himself.” '• 

With Seidel [Goethe’s valet] in 1783 “Once he rang in 
the middle of the night, and when I came into his room he 
had rolled his iron trundle bed from the farthest end of the 
room up to the window and was watching the sky. ‘Haven’t 
you seen anything in the sky^’ he asked me, and when I <fe- 
nied this, ‘Then just run to the guardroom and ask the sen- 
try whether he saw anythmg.’ I ran there, but the sentry 
had seen nothing, which I reported to my master, who was 
still lying in the same position fixedly regarding the sky. 



DIARIES 1912 251 

, ‘Listen,’ he then sai^ to me, ‘this is an important moment. 
Either we are having an earthquake at this very instant or 
we shall have ,one.’ And now I had to sit down on his bed 
and he showsd me what signs had led him to this conclu- 
sion.” (Messina earthquake.) 

A geological walk with von Trebra (September 1783) 
through underbrush and rocks. Goethe in front. 

To Herder’s wife in 1788. Among other things'he said 
also that before he left 2.ome he cried hke a child every day 
for fourteen days. The way Herder’s wife watched him in 
order to report everything to her husband in Ital^. Goethe 
shows great concern for Herder in the presence of his wife. 

September 14, 1794, from eleven-thirty, when Schiller 
got dressed, until eleven o’clock, Goethe spent the time 
without interruption in hterary consultation with Schiller, 
and often so. 

l)avid Veit, October 19, 1794, Jewish kind of observa- 
tion, therefore so easy to understand, as though it had hap- 
pened yesterday. 

“In the evening in Weimar, Der Diener Tfweter Herm 
was acted quite nicely, to my surprise. Goethe was also in 
the theater, and indeed, as always, in the section reserved 
for the nobility. In the middle of the play he leaves this sec- 
tion— which he is supposed to do very seldom— sits down, as 
long as he could hot speak to me, behind me (so the ladies 
beside me said) and as soon as die act is over comes forward, 
bows to me with extreme courtesy and begins in a quite in- 
timate tone . . . brief remarks and replies about the play. . . - 
Thereupon he falls silent for a moment, meanwhile I forget 
that he is the director of the theater and say, ‘They’re act- 
ing it quite nicely too.’ He still keeps looking straight ahead, 
and so in my stupidity— but really in a frame of mind which 



FRANZ KAFKA 


25* 

I cannot analyze— I say once more, ‘They are acting quite 
mcely.’ At that moment he bows to me, but really as cour- 
teously as the first time, and he is gone' Have I insulted him 
or not'’ ... You really won’t believe how dif tressed I still 
am, regardless of the fact that I already have the assurance 
from Humboldt, who now knows him well, that he often 
leaves in this sudden manner, and Humboldt has undertaken 
to speak to him about me once agam.” 

Ano±er time they were speaking about Maimon: “I 
kept interrupting a good deal and often came to his assist- 
ance; for usually there are many words he cannot recall 
and he keeps making faces.” 

1796. Goethe recites Hermann’s conversations with his 
mother at the pear tree in fiirst half of September.'*^ He 
wept. “Thus one melts over one’s own coals,” he said, while 
drying his tears. 

“The wide wooden parapet of the old gentleman’s box.” 
Goethe sometimes liked to have a supply of cold food and 
wine ready in his box, more for the other people— residents 
and friends of importance— whom he not infrequently re- 
ceived there. 

Performance of SchlegeYsAlarcosin 1 802. “In the middle 
of the orchestra Goethe, serious and solemn, throning in his 
tall armchair.” The audience becomes restless, finally at one 
passage a roar of laughter, the whole house shakes. “But 
only for a moment, in a trice Goethe jumped up, with thun- 
derous voice and threatening gestures shouted. Silence, Si- 
lence, and it worked like a charm. In an instant the tumult 
subsided and the unhappy Alarcos went on to the end with 



DIARIES 1912 25} 

7110 further disturbance, but also without the slightest sign 
of applause.” 

Stael: What the French appaiendy take for wit m for- 
eigners is often only ignorance of French. Goethe called an 
idea of Schiller’s neuve et courageuse, that was wonderful, 
but it turned out that he had intended to say hardte. 

Was lockst Du meine Brut . . . herau^ in Todesglut .*^ , 
Stael translated atr brulant. Goethe said he meant the glow 
of coals. She found that extremely maussade and tasteless 
and said that the fine sense for the seemly is lacking in Ger- 
man poets. 

1804 Love for Heinrich Voss.— Goethe read Luise to- 
gether with the Sunday company “To Goethe fell the pas- 
sage about the marriage, which he read with the deepest 
emotion. But his voice grew dejected, he wept and gave the 
book to his neighbor. A holy passage, he cried out with a. 
degree of fervor which shook us all to the depths. 

“We were sitting at lunch and had just consumed the last 
bit of food when Goethe ordered a bone ‘because Voss still 
looks so hungry.’ 

’ "But never is he pleasanter and more lovable than in the 
evening in his room when he is undressed or is sitting on the 
sofa. 

“When I came to him I found everything quite comfort- 
able there. He had lit a fire, had undressed down to a short 
woolen jacket, in which the man looks really splendid.” 

Books: Stilling, Goethe Yearbook, Briefwechsel 
schen Xahel und David Veit. 



FRANZ KAFKA 


254 

^ March 12 In the trolley rapidly pasang by there sat m a 
corner, his cheek against the window, his left arm stretched 
along the back of-the seat, a young man with fn unbuttoned 
overcoat billowing aroufki him, looking down the long, 
empty bench. Today he had become engaged and he could 
dunk of nothing else. His being engaged made him feel 
comfortable and with this feeling he sometimes looked cas- 
ually up at the ceiling of the car. When the conductor came 
to seU him his ticket, after some jingilng, he easily found the 
right com, with a single motion put it into the conductor’s 
hand and seized the ticket between two fingers held open 
like a pair of scissors. There was no real connection between 
him and the trolley and it would not have been surprising 
if, without using the platform or steps, he had appeared on 
the street and gone his way on foot with the same look. 

Only the billowing overcoat remains, everything else is 
made up. 

7 

Mafth 16. Saturday. Again encouragement. Again I catch 
hold of myself, as one catches hold of a ball in its fall. To- 
morrow, today. I’ll begin an extensive work which, without 
being forced, will shape itself according to my abilities, f 
will not give it up as long as I can hold out at alli Rather be 
slefepless than live on in this way. 

Cabaret Lucerna. Several young people each sing a song. 
Such a performance, if we are fresh and listen closely,' more 
strongly impresses upon us the conclusions which the text 
offers for our own life than is possible by the performance 
of experienced artists. For the singer' cannot increase the 
force of the poetry, it always retains an independeifl force- 
fulness which tyrannizes us through the singer, who doesn’t 



DIARIES 1912 255 

'even wear patent lAther shoes, whose hand sometimes will 
not leave his knee, and, if it must, still shows its reluctance, 
who throws Himself quickly down on the bench in order to 
conceal as ifiuch as possible hdW many small, awkward 
mbvements he had needed. 

Love scene in spring, the sort one finds on picture post- 
cards. Devotion, a portrayal which touches and shapeS*the 
public —Fatinitza Viennese smger Sweet, significant laugh. 
Reminds me of Hansi. A face with meaningless details,* 
mostly too sharp, held together and smoothed ^down by 
laughter. Ineffective superiority over the audience which 
one must grant her when she stands on the stage and laughs 
out into the indifferent audience.— Thea Degen’s stupid 
dance, with flying will-o’-the-wisps, twigs, butterflies, 
death’s head. 

Four “Rocking Girls.” One very pretty. The program 
dees not give her name. She was on the audience’s extreme 
right. How busily she threw her^arms about, in what un- 
usually palpable, silent movement were her thin long leg?* 
and delicately playing little joints, the way she didn\ keep 
time, but didn’t let herself be frightened out of her business, 
what a soft smile she had in contrast to the distorted ones of 
tl^e others, how almost voluptuous her face and hair were in 
comparisOh with the spareness of her body, the way she 
called “slowly” to the musicians, for her sisters as well as 
for herself. Their dancing master, a young, strikingly 
dressed, thin person, stood behind the musicians and waved 
one hand in rhythm, regarded neither by the musicians nor 
by the dancers and with his own eyes on the audience. 

Wamebold, fiery nervousness of a powerful person. In 
l)is«oiovements there is sometimes a joke whose strength 
lifts one up. How he hurries to the piano with long steps 
after the number is announced. 



FUANZ KAFKA 


256 

Read Aus dem Leben etnes Schlachtdhmalers. Read Flau- 
bert aloud with satisfaction. 

f 1 

The necessity of speaking of dangers with* exclamation 
pomts. Because in that way one imitates their motion, be- 
cause one remains m the rhythm and the thought does not 
then mrerfere with the enjoyment, because then the action 
always comes at the end of the sentence and prolongs its 
effect better. 

March 1 7. During these days read Mor gemot by Stossl.^® 

Max’s concert Sunday. My almost unconscious listening. 
From now on I can no longer be bored by music. I no longer 
seek, as I did in vain in the past, to penetrate this impenetra- 
ble circle which immediately forms about me together with 
the music, I am also careful not to jump over it, which I 
nrobably could do, but instead I remain calmly in my 
thoughts that develop and subside in this narrowed space 
without It being possible for disturbing self-observations to 
step into their slow swarm. The beautiful “magic circle” 
(by Max) that seems here and there to open the breast of 
the singer. 

Goethe, “Trost in Tranen.” Alles geben die Gotter, die 
unendlichen,/ Ihren Lieblingen ganz:/ Alle Freuden, die 
unendlichen,/ Alle Schmerzen, die unendlichen, ganz. 

My incompetence in the presence of my mother, in the 
presence of Miss T. and in Ac presence of all those in the 
Continental at that time and later on Ae street. 

Manfzelle Nitouche on Monday. The good effSet of a 
French word in a Aeary German performance. Boarding- 



DIARIES I9IZ 257 

> school girls m bright dresses, with their arms outstretched, 
run into the garden behind a fence. Barracks-yard of the 
dragoon regiment at mght. Some officers in a barracks in 
the background are^havmg a ■farewell celebration irf a 
hill that IS reached by going up a few steps. Mam’zelle 
Nitouche enters and is persuaded by love and recklessness 
to take part in the celebration. The sort of thing that«can 
happen to a girl' In the mommg at the convent, in the eve- 
mng a substitute for an operetta singer who couldn’t come,, 
and at night in the dragoons’ barracks. 

Today, painfully tired, spent the afternoon on the sofa. 

March 1 8 . 1 was wise, if you hke, because I was prepared 
for death at any moment, but not because I had taken care 
of everything that was given me to do, rather because I had 
dgne none of it and could not even hope ever to do any 
of it. 

March 22. (The last few days I have been writing down 
the wrong dates ) Baum’s lecture in the lecture hall. G. F., 
nineteen years old, getting married next week. Dark, fault- 
Jess, slender face Distended nostrils. For years she has been 
wearing Iftts and clothes styled like a hunter’s. The same 
dark-green gleam on her face. The strands of hair running 
along her cheeks seem to unite with new ones growing 
along the cheeks, just as in general a slight down seems to 
cover all her face which she has bowed down into the dark- 
ness. Points of her elbows resting hghtly on the arms of 
her chair. Then on the Wenzelsplatz a brisk bow, com- 
plaf^with little energy, a tom and a drawing erect of the 
poorly dressed, slender body. I looked at her much less 
often than I wanted to. 



FRANZ KAFKA 


258 

March 24. Sunday, yesterday. Dtv Sternenbraut by 
Christian von Ehrenf els.— Lost in watching. The sick officer 
in the play. The 'sick body in the tight unifcrm that made 
health and decisiveness a duty. 

Jn the morning in the bright sun at Max’s for half an 
hour. 

. In the next room my mother is entertaining the L. couple. 
They are talkmg about vermin and corns. (Mr. L. has six 
corns on each toe.) It is easy to see that there is no real 
progress made in conversations of this sort. It is information 
that will be forgotten agam by both and that even now 
proceeds along m self-forgetfulness without any sense of 
responsibihty. But for the very reason that such conversa- 
tions are unthinkable without absent-mindedness, they re- 
veal empty spaces which, if one insists, can be filled only by 
thinking, or, better yet, by dreams. 

March 25. The broom sweepmg the rug in the next room 
sounds like the train of a dress moving in jerks. 

March 26. Only not to overestimate what I have written, 
for in that way I make what is to be written unattainable. 

March 27. Monday, on the street. The boy who, with 
several others, threw a large ball at a servant girl walking 
defenselessly in front of them; just as the ball was flying at 
the girl’s behind I grabbed him by the throat, choked him 
in fury, thrust him aside, and swore. Then walked on and 
didn’t even look at the girl. One quite forgets one’s eartUy 
existence because one is so entirely full of fury anllrts per- 
mitted to believe that, given the opportunity, one would 



DIARIES 1912 259 

> in the same way fiM oneself with even more beauaful emo- 
tions. 

> 

> 

March 28« From Mrs. Fantajs lecture, “Impressions' of 
Berlin”: Grillparzer once didn’t want to go to a party be- 
cause he knew that Hebbel, with whom he was friendly, 
would also be there. “He will question me again about my 
opinion on God, and, when I won’t know what to* say, he 
will become rude.”— My awkward behavior. , 

March 29. Delighted with the bathroom. Gradual under- 
standing. The afternoons I spent on my hair. 

April 1. For the first time in a week an almost complete 
failure in writing. Why’ Last week too I lived through 
various moods and kept their influence away from my 
writing, but I am afraid to write about it. 

April 3, This IS how a day passes— in the morning, th^ 
ofiice, in the afternoon, the factory, now in the «iening, 
shouting to the right and left of me at home, later brought 
my sister home from Hamlet—ind. I haven’t been able to 
make use of a single moment. 

April 8? Saturday before Easter. Complete knowledge of 
oneself. To be aiile to seize the whole of one’s abilities hke 
a little ball. To accept the greatest dechne as something 
familiar and so still remain elastic in it. 

tDesire for a deeper sleep that dissolves more. The meta- 
physical urge is only the urge toward death. 

How affectedly I spoke today in Haas’ " presence be- 
cause he praised Max’s and my travel report, so that in this 



26o FRANZ KAFKA 

way, at least, I might make myself worthy of the praise that 
the report does not warrant, or so that I might continue by 
fraud the fraudulent or lying effect of the travel report, or 
in the spirit of Haas’ amiabfe he, which I tried to make easier 
for him. 

May 6. 1 1 o’clock. For the first time in a considerable 
while a complete failure in writing. The feeling of a tried 
man. 

Dreamed recently: 

I was riding with my father through Berlin in a trolley. 
The big-city quahty was represented by countless striped 
toll bars standing upright, finished off bluntly at the ends. 
Aside from that everything was almost empty, but there 
was a great forest of these toll bars. We came to a gate, got 
out without any sense of getting out, stepped through the 
gate. On the other side of the gate a sheer wall rose up, 
“vvhich my father ascended almost in a dance, his legs flew 
out as he climbed, so easy was it for him. There was cer- 
tainly also some inconsiderateness in the fact that he did 
not help me one bit, for I got to the top only with the ut- 
most effort, on all fours, often sliding back again, as though 
the wall had become steeper under me. At the sahie time it 
was also distressing that [the wall] was covered with 
human excrement so that flakes of it clung to me, chiefly 
to my breast. I looked down at the flakes with bowed head 
and ran my hand over them. 

When at last I reached the top, my father, who by tMs 
time was already coming out of a building, immediately 
fell on my neck and kissed and embraced me He was w<L'*r- 
ing an old-fashioned, short Prince Albert, padde^ra the 
inside like a sofa, which I remembered well. “This Dr. von 



26 i 


DIARIES 1912 

JLeyden! He is an excellent man,” he exclaimed over and 
over again But he had by no means visited him m his 
capacity as doctor, but rather only as a man worth know- 
mg. I was a httle afraid that I should have to go in to ste 
him too, but this wasn’t required of me. Behind me to the 
left I ^aw, sitting in a room hterally surrounded by glass 
walls, a man who turned his back on me. It turned out that 
this man was the professor’s secretary, that my father had 
in fact spoken only with him and not with the professor ^ 
himself, but that somehow or other, through the secretary, 
he had recognized the excellences of the professor in the 
flesh, so that m every respect he was as much enutled to an 
opimon on the professor as if he had spoken to him in 
person- 

Lessing Theater: Die Ratten, 

fetter to Pick because I haven’t written to him. Card to 
Max in joy over Arnold Beer. 

May 9. Yesterday evening m the coffeehouse wirti Pick. 
How I hold fast to my novel against all restlessness, like 
a figure on a monument that looks mto the distance and 
Jipids fast to Its pedestal. 

Hopeless evening with the family today. My brother-in- 
law needs money for the factory, my father is upset because 
of my sister, because of the business and because of his 
heart, my unhappy second sister, my mother unhappy 
about all of them, and I with my scribblings. 

J^ay 22. Yesterday a wonderfully beautiful evening with 
'TVlax. lifl love myself, I love him more. Cabaret Lucema. 
Madame la mart by Rachilde. Dream of a Spring Momr- 



FRANZ KAFKA 



ing. The gay, fat girl in the box. The wild one with the 
coarse nose, her face smudged with soot, her shoulders 
squeezed up out of her dress (which wasn’t decollete, how- 
ever) and her back twisted to and fro, her simple, blue 
blouse with white polka dots, her fencer’s glove, which 
was always visible since most of the time her right hand 
war either resting flat, or on its fingertips, on the right 
thigh of her hvely mother seated beside her. Her braids 
.twisted over her ears, a not-too-clean bght-blue ribbon on 
the back of her head, the hair in front encircles her fore- 
head in a thin but compact tuft that projects far out in 
front. Her warm, wrinkled, light cloak carelessly falling 
in folds when she was dickering at the box ofiice. 

May 23. Yesterday, behind us, out of boredopi, a man 
fell from his chair.— Comparison by Rachilder-^hose who 
rejoice in the sun and demand that others rejoice are bke 
drunkards coming from a wedding at night who force 
/liose they meet to drink the health of the unknown bride. 

Letter to Weltsch, proposed that we use “Du” to one 
another. Yesterday a good letter to Uncle Alfred about the 
factory. Day before yesterday letter to Lowy. 

Now, in the evening, out of boredom, washed my hands 
in the bathroom three times in succession. 

The child with the two little braids, bare head, loose 
litde red dress with white dots, bare legs and feet, whft, 
with a little basket in one h^dya little box in the other, 
hesitatingly walked across die Weet near the Na riona l 
Theater. 



DIARIES 19IZ 263 

, How the actors j«i the play, Madame la mart, turn their 
backs to the audience, on the principle that the back of an 
amateur i!s, otl^er things being equal, as bea^itiful as the back 
of a professional actor. The conscientiousness of peopled 

i 

A few days ago an excellent lecture by Davis Trietsch 
on colonization in Palestine. 

May 25. Weak tempo, little blood. 

May 27. Yesterday Whitsunday, cold weather, a not very 
nice excursion with Max and Weltsch. In the evening, 
coffeehouse, Werfel gives me Besuch aus dem Elysium. 

Part of Niklasstrasse and aU of the bridge turns around 
to look sentimentally at a dog who, loudly barking, is chas- 
ing an ambulance. Until suddenly the dog stops, tiu-ns away 
and proves to be an ordinary, strange dog who meant noth- 
ing in particular by his pursuit of the vehicle. 

June I. Wrote nothing. 

June 2 Wrote almost nothing. 

'’Yesterdjiy lecture on America by Dr. Soukup. (The 
Czechs in Nebraska, all officials in America are elected, 
jveryone must belong to one of the three parties— Repub- 
ican, Democratic, Socialist— Roosevelt’s election meeting, 
with his glass he threatened a farmer who had made an ob- 
jaction, street speakers who carry a small box with them 
to serve as a platform.) Then spring festival, met Paul 
Kisch who talked about his dissertation, “Hebbel and the 



FRANZ KAFKA 


264 

June 6. Thursday. Corpus Christi. Two horses in a race, 
how one lowers its head out of the race and shakes its mane 
vigorously, them raises its head and only now, apparently 
fdtling better, resumes the race which it har never really 
interrupted. 

I have just read in Flaubert’s letters: “My novel is the 
cliff on which I am hanging, and I know nothing of what 
is going on in the world.’’— Like what I noted down about 
myself on May 9th. 

Without weight, without bones, without body, walked 
through the streets for two hours considering what I over- 
came this afternoon while wnting. 

June 7. Bad. Wrote nothing today. Tomorrow no time. 

it 

July 6. Monday. Began a little. Am a little sleepy. Also 
-i!»st among these entirely strange people.*® 

f 

July 9. Nothing written for so long. Begin tomorrow. 
Otherwise I shall again get into a prolonged, irresistible 
dissatisfaction; I am really in it already. The nervous states 
are beginning. But if I can do something, then J can do it 
without superstitious precautions. 

e 

The invention of the devil. If we are possessed by the 
devil, it cannot be by one, for then we should live, at least 
here on earth, quietly, as with God, in unity, without con- 
tradiction, without reflection, always sure of the man be- 
hind us. His face would not frighten us, for as diabolical 
beings we would, if somewhat sensitive to the §i|^St|^e 
clever enough to prefer to sacrifice a hand in order to keep 



DIARIES 1912 265 

’his face covered wAh it. If we were possessed by only a 
single devil, one who had a cahn, untroubled view of our 
whole nature, ^nd freedom to dispose of uJ at any moment, 
then that devil woulc^ also have Enough power to hold us 
fo^ the length of a human hfe high above the spuit of God 
in us, -and even to swing us to and fro, so that we should 
never get to see a glimmer of it and therefore should not 
be troubled from tha|t quarter Only a crowd of devils 
could account for our earthly misfortunes. Why don’t they * 
exterminate one another until only a single one js left, or 
why don’t they subordinate themselves to one great devil? 
Either way would be in accord with the diabolical prin- 
ciple of deceiving us as completely as possible. With unity 
lacking, of what use is the scrupulous attention all the 
devils pay us^ It simply goes without saying that the fall- 
ing of a human hair must matter more to the devil than to 
G«d, since the devil really loses that hair and God does not. 
But we still do not arrive at any state of well-being so long 
as the many devils are within us. 

August 7. Long torment. Finally wrote to Max that I 
cannot clear up the little pieces that still remain, do not want 
to, force myself to it and therefore will not publish the 
book.®® ® 

August 8. Completed “Confidence Trickster” more or 
less satisfactorily. With the last strength of a normal state 
of mind. Twelve o’clock, how will I be able to sleep? 

August 9. The upset night. Yesterday the maid who sad 
to the little boy on the steps, “Hold on to my skirt! ” 

My inspired reading aloud of Der onne Spiebnsftn. The 
perception in this story of what is manly in Grillparzer. 



266 


FRANZ KAFKA 


The way he can risk everything and risks nothing, because 
there is nothing but truth in him already, a truth that even 
m the face of the' contradictory impressions bf the moment 
will justify Itself as such \#hen the crucial time arrives. The 
calm self-possession. The slow pace that neglects nothing. 
The immediate readiness, when it is needed, not soonar, for 
lonjg m advance he sees eveiything that is commg. 

' August lo. Wrote nothing. Was in the factory and 
breathed gas in the engine room for two hours. The energy 
of the foreman and the stoker before the engine, which for 
some undiscoverable reason will not start. Miserable fac- 
tory. 

August 1 1. Nothing, nothing. How much time the pub- 
lishing of the little book takes from me and how much 
harmful, ridiculous pride comes from reading old things 
with an eye to publication. Only that keeps me from writ- 
ing. And yet in reality I have achieved nothing, the dis- 
turbance IS the best proof of it. In any event, now, after the 
publication of the book, I will have to stay away from 
magazines and reviews even more than before, if I do not 
wish to be content with just sticking the tips of my fingers 
into the truth. How immovable I have become' Formerly, 
if I said only one word that opposed th^ direction of the 
moment, I at once flew over to the other side, now I simply 
look at myself and remain as I am. 

August 14. Letter to Rowohlt. 

Dear Mr. Rowohlt: 

I am enclosing the httle prose pieces you wanted to see; 
they will probably be enough to make up a small book. ' 
While I was putting them together toward this end, I some- 



DIARIES 1912 267 

fimes had to choose Jaecwepn satisfying my sense of respon- 
sibility and an eagerness to have a book among your beau- 
tiful books. Certainly I did not in each lastance make an 
entirely clear-cut decision. But now I should naturally Be 
happy if the things pleased you sufficiently to print them. 
After gll, even with the greatest skill and the greatest un- 
derstanding the bad in them is not discernible at first sight. 
Isn’t what is most unn^rsally mdividual in writers the fact 
that each conceals his bad qualities m an enturely different ' 
ways , 

Faithfully— 

August 15 Wasted day. Spent sleeping and lying down. 
Feast of St. Mary on the Altstadter Ring. The man with a 
voice that seemed to come from a hole in the ground. 
Thought much of-what embarrassment before writing 
doVn names— F. B.®^ O. has just been reciting poems b/ 
Goethe She chooses them with right feeling “Trost i^ 
Tranen.” “An Lotte.” “An Werther.” “An den Mood.” 

Ag ain read old diaries instead of keeping away from 
them. I live as irrationally as is at all possible. And the pub- 
lication of the thirty-one pages is to blame for everything. 
£v^en more to blame, of course, is my weakness, which per- 
mits a thing of this sort to influence me. Instead of shaking 
myself, I sit here -and consider how I could express all this 
as insultingly as possible. But my horrible calm interferes 
with my inventiveness. I am curious as to how I shall find 
a jvay out of this state I don’t permit others to push me, 
nor do I know which is “the right path.” So what will hap- 
pen? Have I finally run aground, a great mass in shallow 
water? tn that case, however, I should at least be able to 
turn my head. That’s what I do, however. 



268 


FRANZ KAFKA 


August 1 6. Nothing, either in the, office or at home. 
Wrote a few pages in the Weimar diary. 

This evening the whimpering of my popr mother be- 
cause I don’t eat. 

L 

. August 20. Outside my window, across the university 
building site partly overgrown with weeds, the little boys, 
both in blue blouses, one in light blue, the other, smaller 
one in darker blue, are each carrying a bundle of dry hay 
that fills their arms. They struggle up a slope with it. Charm 
of it all for the eyes. 

This morning the empty open wagon and the large, 
emaciated horse pulling it. Both, making a final effort to 
get up a slope, stretched out to an unusual length. Seen at 
an angle by the spectator. The horse, front legs raised a 
little, his neck stretched sideward and upward. Over Ijim 
the whip of the driver. 

( 

If Rowohlt would send it back and I could lock it up 
again as if it had all never happened, so that I should be only 
as unhappy as I was before. 

Miss F. B. When I arrived at Brod’s on August 13th, she 
was sitting at the table. I was not at all curious about who 
she was, but rather took her for granted at once. Bony, 
empty face that wore its emptiness openly. Bare throat. A 
blouse thrown on. Looked very domestic in her dress al- 
though, as it later turned out, she by no means was.> (I 
alienate myself from her a little by inspecting her so closely. 
What a state I’m in now, indeed, alienated in general from 
the whole of everything good, and don’t even belifcve it yet.» 
If the literary talk at Max’s doesn’t distract me too much. 



DIARIES 19IZ 269 

J’ll try to write the^story. about Blenkelt today. It needn’t 
be long, but I must hit it off right.) Almost broken nose. 
Blond, somewhat straight, unattractive hair, strong chin. 
As I was taking my seat I looked^at her closely for the first 
time, by the time I was seated I already had an unshakable 
opinio;i. 

August 21. Read L^z incessantly and— such is niy state 
—he restored me to my senses. 

The picture of dissatisfaction presented by a street, 
where everyone is perpetually lifting his feet to escape 
from the place on which he stands. 

August 30. All this time did nothing. The visit of my 

uncle from Spain. Last Saturday in the Arco Werfel recited 

hl«,“Lebensheder” and “Opfer.” A monster! But I looked 

him in the eye and held it all evening. 

> 

It will be hard to rouse me, and yet I am restless "When 
I lay in bed this afternoon and someone quickly turned a 
key in the lock, for a moment I had locks all over my body, 
3S though at a fancy-dress ball, and at short intervals a lock 
was opened or shut here and there. 

Questionnaire 6y the magazine Miroir, about love in the 
present and the way love has changed since the days of our 
grandparents An actress answered. Never did they love 
as well as today. 

How shaken and exalted I was after hearing Werfel! 
How I Behaved afterward at L.’s party, wild, almost, and 
without a fault. 



270 


FRANZ KAFKA 


This month, which, because of the absence of the boss, 
could have been put to exceptionally good use, I have 
wasted and slept away without much excuse (seiidmg the 
bdok off to Rowohlt, abscesses, my uncle’s visit). Even 
this afternoon I stretched out on the bed for three horns 
with dreamy excuses. 

September 4. My uncle from Spain. The cut of his coat. 

. The effect of his nearness. The details of his personality. 
His floating through the anteroom mto the toilet, in the 
course of which he makes no reply to what is said to him. 
Becomes mdder from day to day, if one judges not in 
terms of a gradual change but by the moments which stand 
out. 

September 5 I ask him- How is one to reconcile the fact 
that you are generally dissatisfied, as you recently said, and 
that nevertheless you are at home everywhere, as can, be 
s&n time and again (and which is revealed in the rude- 
fiess always characteristic of this sort of being-at-home, I 
thought). He answers, as I remember it “In individual 
things I am dissatisfied, this doesn’t extend to the whole. I 
often dine in a little French pension that is very exclusive 
and expensive For example, a room for a couple, with 
meals, costs fifty francs a day. So I sit there between the 
secretary of the French legation, for example, and a Spanish 
general of artillery. Opposite me sit a high official of the 
navy ministry and some count or other. I know them all 
well by now, sit down in my place, greeting them on all 
sides, because I am m a peculiar mood I say not another 
word until the goodbye with which I take my leave. Then 
I am alone on the street and really can’t see what purpose 
this evening served. I go home and regret that I didn’t 
marry. Naturally this mood passes away again, whether be- 



DIARIES I9IZ 271 

■cause I have thought it through to the end, whether because 
the thoughts have dispersed. But on occasion it comes back 
again.” 

September 8. Sunday morning. Yesterday a letter to Dr. 
Schiller. 

Afternoon. The way my mother, together with a crowd 
of women, with a vejy loud voice, is playing witli some 
small children nearby and drives me out of the house. Don’t* 
cry' Don’t cry' etc. That’s his' That’s his' etc., Two big^ 
people! etc. He doesn’t want to! . . . But' But! . . . How 
did you like Vienna, Dolphi^ Was it nice there? ... I ask 
you, just look at his hands' 

September 1 1. The evenmg of the day before yesterday 
with Utitz. 

A dream I found myself on a jetty of square-cut stones 
built far out into the sea. Someone, or even several peoplg, 
were with me, but my awareness of myself was so,strong 
that I hardly knew more about them than that I was speak- 
ing to them. I can remember only the raised knees of some- 
one sitting near me. At first I did not really know where I 
ivis, only when once I accidentally stood up did I see on 
my left and behind me on my right the distant, clearly out- 
lined sea with m/iny battleships lined up in rows and at 
anchor. On the right New York could be seen, we were in 
New York Harbor. The sky was gray, but of a constant 
brightness. I moved back and forth in my seat, freely ex- 
posed to the air on all sides, m order to be able to see every- 
thing. In the direction of New York my glance slanted 
downward a little, in the direction of the sea it slanted up- 
ward. I now noticed the water rise up near us in high waves, 
on which was borne a great cosmopohtan traffic I can re- 



FRANZ KAFKA 


*72 

member only that instead of the rafts --ve have, there were 
long timbers hshed together into gigantic bundles the cut 
ends of u hich kept popping out of the \\ ater during the 
voyage, higher or lower,’ according to the height of the 
waves, and at the same time kept turning end over end* m 
the water. I sat down, drew up my feet, quivered with 
pleksui;e, virtually dug myself into the ground in delight, 
and said Really, this is even mon* interesting than the 
traffic on a Paris boulevard. 

September 1 2. This evening Dr. L. at our house. Another 
emigrant to Palestine. Is taking his bar examination a year 
before the end of his clerkship and is leaving (in two 
weeks) for Palestine with 1,200 K. Will try to get a position 
with the Palestine Office. All these emigrants to Palestine 
(Dr. B , Dr. K.) have downcast eyes, feel blinded by their 
listeners, fumble around on the table with the tips of tlicir 
ciitended fingers, their voices quiver, they smile weakly 
and prop up these smilei with a httle irony Dr. K. told us 
that his students are chauvinists, have the Maccabees for- 
ever in their mouths and want to take after them. 

I become aware that I wrote so eagerly and well to Dr. 
Schiller only because Miss B. stopped in Breslau, and I hive 
been thinking about sending flowers to her tfirough Dr. 
Schiller, and although all this was two weeks ago, a trace 
of it is still in the air. 

September 15. Engagement of my sister Valli. 

Aus dem Gnmde From the pit 

der Ermattung of exhaustion 

steigen ivir we ascend 

mit neuen Kraften, witfi renewed strength— 



m 


DIAKIES 1912 

Dunkle Herren, Dark lords, 

ivelche warten who wait 

bis die Kinder until the childreh 

stch entkraften. exhaust themselves. 

•t • ^ 

Love between brother and sister— the repeating of the 
love between mother and father. 

The hollow which the work of genius has burned into, 
our surroundings is a good place into which to put one’s 
little light. Therefore the inspirauon that emanates from 
genius, the umversal inspiration that doesn’t only drive one 
to imitation. 

September 18. H ’s stones yesterday in the office. The 
stone breaker on the highway who begged a frog from 
hipa, held it by the feet and with three bites swallowed 
down first the little head, then the rump and finally tfte 
feet.— The best way to kill cats, who cling stubbornly Tb 
life: Squeeze their throats in a closed door and pull their 
tails.— His horror of vermin In the army one mght he had 
an itch under his nose, he slapped it in his sleep and crushed 
sopiething. But the something was a bedbug and he carried 
the stench«f it around with him for days. 

Four people ate a well-prepared roast cat, but only three 
knew what they were eating. After the meal the three 
began to meow, but the fourth refused to believe it, only 
when they showed him the bloody skin did he believe it, 
cduld not run out fast enough to vomit everything up 
again and was very sick for two weeks. 

This stone breaker ate nothing but bread and whatever 
else in the way of fruit or living flesh that he accidentally 



FRANZ KAFKA 


came upon, and drank nothing but brandy. Slept in the 
shed of a brickyard. Once H. met him at twilight in the 
fields. “Stand sail,” the man said, “or . . .” For the sport of 
It, .H. stopped. “Give me your cigarette,” the man went on. 
H. gave It to him. “Give me another one!”— “So you want 
another one^” H. asked him, held his gnarled stick m his 
left hand in case of trouble and struck him m the face with 
his right so that he dropped the cigarette. The man ran 
away at once, cowardly and weak, the way such brandy 
driidcers are. 

Yesterday at B.’s with Dr. L. Song about Reb Dovidl, 
Reb Dovidl of Vassilko is gomg to Talne today. In a city 
between Vassilko and Talne they sing it indifferently, in 
Vassilko weepingly, in Talne happily. 

September 19. Comptroller P. tells about the trip which 
he- took in the company of a schoolmate at the age of 
tldrteen with seventy kreuzers in his pocket. How one 
evenm|f they came to an inn where a huge drinking bout 
was going on in honor of the mayor who had returned 
from his military service. More than fifty empty beer bot- 
tles were standing on the floor. The whole place was full of 
pipe smoke. The stench of the beer dregs. Th? two little 
boys agamst the wall. The drunken mayor who, remem- 
bering his military service, wants to m a int a in discipline 
everywhere, comes up to them and threatens to have them 
sent home under arrest as deserters, what he takes them for 
in spite of all their explanations. The boys tremble, shosw 
their Gymnasium identity cards, decline “mensa”; a half- 
drunk teacher looks on without helping them. Without 
being given any definite decision about their fate they are 
compelled to join in the drinking, are very pleased to get 



DIARIES 1912 275 

^ for nothing so mujph good beer which, with their hmited 
means, they would never have dared to all<iw themselves. 
They drink themselves full and then, latent night, after the 
last guests haye departed, go to s^eep on thinly spread straw 
H^this room which had not been aired, and sleep like lords. 
But af four o’clock a gigantic maid with a broom arrives, 
says she has no time, and would have swept them outdnto 
the mormng mist if^they had not themselves run away. 
When the room was cleaned up a little, two large coflfeei 
pots, filled to the brim, were placed on the table for them. 
But when they stirred their coffee with their spoons, some- 
thing large, dark, round kept coming to the surface from 
rime to time. They thought it would be explained m time 
and drank with appetite until, m view of the half-emptied 
pots and the dark object, they became really worried and 
asked the maid’s advice. Then it turned out that the black 
object was old, congealed goose blood which had been left 
in the pots from yesterday’s feast and onto which the c6f- 
fee had simply been poured in the stupor of ffi? momfllg 
after. At once the boys ran out and vomited everything to 
the last little drop. Later they were called before the par- 
son who, after a short examination in religion, established 
itliat they were honest boys, had the cook serve them some 
soup and then sent them on their way with his spiritual 
blessing. As pupils in a clerical Gymnasium they had this 
soup and this blessing given to them in almost every par- 
sonage they came to. 

■* September 20 Letters to Lowy and Miss Taussig yester- 
day, to Miss B. and Max today. 

September 23.®* This story, wroteatone 
sitting during the night of the 22nd-23rd, from ten o clock 



FRANZ KAFKA 


276 

at night to SIX o’clock in the morning. I was hardly able to 
pull my legs o.ut from under the desk, they had got so stiff 
from sittmg. Ih^ fearful stram and joy, how the jtory de- 
vekiped before me, as if I were advancing over water. Sev- 
eral times during this night I heaved my own weight on 
my back. How everything can be said, how for every- 
thing, for the strangest fancies, there waits a great fire in 
which they perish and ris e up agaii^. How it turned blue 
.outside the wmdow. A wagon rolled by. Two men walked 
across the bridge. At two I looked at the clock for the last 
dme. As the maid walked through the anteroom for the 
first time I wrote the last sentence. Turning out the light 
and the light of day. The slight pains around my heart. The 
weariness that disappeared m the middle of the night. The 
tremblmg entrance mto my sisters' room Reading aloud. 
Before that, stretching in the presence of the maid and say- 
ing, “I’ve been writing until now.” The appearance of the 
ufidisturbed bed, as though it had just been brought in. 
Trie conviction verified that with my novel-writing I am 
in the s'hameful lowlands of writing. Only in this way can 
Anting be done, only with such coherence, with such a 
complete opening out of the body and the soul. Mommg 
in bed. The always clear eyes. Many emotions carried 
along in the writing, joy, for example, that h shall have 
something beautiful for Max’s Arkadia, thoughts about 
Freud, of course; in one passage, of Arhold Beer; in an- 
other, of Wassermann, in one, of Werfel’s giantess; of 
course, also of my “The Urban World.” 

I, only I, am the spectator in the orchestra. 

Gustav Blenkelt was a simple man with regulair habits. 
He didn't like any unnecessary display and had a definite 



DIARIES I9IZ 277 

, opinion about people who VJ'ent in for such display. Al- 
though he was a bachelor, he felt he had ar( absolute right 
to say a few deciding words in the maritrl affairs of his ac- 
quaintances »nd anyone who would even have questioned 
stijch a right would have fared badly with him. He used to 
speak, his mind freely and did not in any way seek to detain 
those listeners whom his opimons happened not to sui«. As 
there are everywhere, there were people who admired 
him, people who honored him, people who put up with 
him, and, finally, those who wanted to have nothing to do 
with him. Indeed, every person, even the emptiest, is, if 
one will only look carefully, the center of a tight cncle 
that forms about him here and there, how could it be 
otherwise in the case of Gustav Blenkelt, at bottom an ex- 
ceptionally social person^ 

In his thirty-fifth year, the last year of his life, he spent 
aij unusual amount of time with a young couple named 
Strong It is certain that for Mr. Strong, who had opeffed 
a furniture store with his wife’s money, the acquaintance 
with Blenkelt had numerous advantages, since the largest 
part of the latter’s acquaintances consisted of young, mar- 
riageable people who sooner or later had to think of pro- 
iVj^ing new furniture for themselves and who, out of old 
habit, wCiC usually accustomed not to neglect Blenkelt’s 
advice in this matter, either. “I keep them on a tight rein,” 

0 ■ 

Blenkelt used to say. 

September 24. My sister said: The house (in the story) 
is® very like ours. I said; How? In that case, then, Father 
would have to be living in the toilet. 

September 25. By force kept myself from writing. 
Tossed in bed. The congestion of blood in my head and 



FRANZ KAFKA 


278 

the useless drifting by of things. What harmfulness'— Yes- 
terday read a' Baum’s, to the Baum family, my sisters, 
Alarta, Dr. Biotk’s wife and her wo sons (one of them a 
ont-year-volunteer in the army;. Toward the end my 
hand was moving uncontrollably about and actually be- 
fore my face There were tears in my eyes. The mdubita- 
bility of the story was confirmed.— This evemng tore 
myself Way from my writmg. Movies m the National 
Theater. Miss O , whom a clergyman once pursued. She 
came home soaked in cold sweat. Danzig. Life of Komer. 
The horses. The white horse. The smoke of pow'der. 
“Liitzows Wilde Jagd.” 

February 1 1. While I read the proofs of The Judgment, 
I’ll write down all the relationships which have become 
clear to me in the story as far as I now remember them. 
This is necessary because the story came out of me like a 
rekl birth, covered with filth and slime, and only I have the 
hand that can reach to tfie body itself and the strength of 
desire to do so: 

The friend is the link between father and son, he is their 
strongest common bond. Sittmg alone at his wmdow, 
Georg rummages voluptuously in this consciousness of 
what they have in common, beheves he has his father 
within him, and would be at peace with everything if it 
were not for a fleeting, sad thoughtfulness In the course of 
the story the father, with the strengthened position that 
the other, lesser things they share in common give him— 
love, devotion to the mother, loyalty to her memory, the 
clientele that he (the father) had been the first to acquire 
for the business— uses the common bond of the friend to 
set himself up as Georg’s antagonist. Georg is left with 
nothing; the bride, who lives in the story only in rela- 



non to the friend,^ that is, tp what father and son have 
in common, is easily driven away by the father since 
no marr/age has yet taken place, and so ^he cannot pene- 
trate the cir(j|le of blood relatiopship that is drawn around 
father and son. AVhat they have in common is built up en- 
tirely^ around the father, Georg can feel it only as some- 
thmg foreign, something that has become mdependentfthat 
he has never given e^nough protection, that is exposed to 
Russian revolutions, and only because he himself has lost 
everything except his awareness of the father, does the 
judgment, which closes off his father from him com- 
pletely, have so strong an effect on him. 

Georg has the same number of letters as Franz. In Ben- 
demann, “mann” is a strengthening of “Bende” to provide 
for all the as yet unforeseen possibihties in the story. But 
Bende has exactly the same number of letters as Kafka, and 
the vowel e occurs in the same places as does the vowel a 
in Kafka. 

Frieda has as many letters as F. and the samn imtial, 
Brandenfeld has the same imual as B., and in the word 
“Feld” a certain connection in meamng, as well. Perhaps 
even the thought of Berlin was not without influence and 
"the recollection of the Mark Brandenburg perhaps had 
some influence. 

February 12. In describing the friend I kept thinking of 
Steuer. Now when I happened to meet him about three 
months after I had written the story, he told me that he 
h^d become engaged about three months ago. 

After I read the story at Weltsch’s yesterday, old Mr. 
Weltsch went out and, when he returned after a short 
time, pxaised especially the graphic descriptions in the 
story. With his arm extended he said, “I see this father be- 



28 o 


FRANZ KAFKA 


fore me,” all the tune lookmg directly at the empty chair 
in which he ha^ been sittmg while I was reading. 

My sister saii, “It is our house.” I was astonished at how 
mistaken she was m the setting and said, “In that case, then. 
Father would have to be hvmg in the toilet.” 

Fdiruary 28. Ernst Liman arrived in Constantinople on 
a business trip one ramy fall morning, and, as was his cus- 
tom— this was the tenth tune he was making this trip— with- 
out paying attention to anythmg else, drove through the 
otherwise empty streets to the hotel at which he always 
stopped and which he found suited him. It was almost cool, 
the drizzhng ram blew mto the carriage and, annoyed by 
the bad weather which had been pursuing him all through 
his busmess trip this year, he put up the carnage wmdow 
and leaned back m a comer to sleep away the fifteen min- 
utes or so of the drive that was before him. But since the 
drWfer took him straight through the business district, fie 
could get no rest, and the shouts of the street vendors, the 
rolling of the heavy wagons, as well as other noises, mean- 
ingless on the surface, such as a crowd clapping its hands, 
disturbed his usually sound sleep. 

At the end of his drive an unpleasant surprise awaited 
him. Durmg the last great fire in Stambul, about which 
Liman had probably read dunng his trip, the Hotel Kings- 
ton, at which It was his habit to stop, half been burned al- 
most to the ground, but the driver, who of course knew 
this, had nevertheless carried out his passenger’s instmc- 
tions with complete indifference, and without a word had 
brought him to the site of the hotel which had burned 
down. Now he calmly got down from the box and would 
even have unloaded Liman’s luggage if the latter iiad not 
seized him by the shoulder and shaken him, whereupon 



J 


DIARIES 1913 


2B1 


,the driver then let go of thi luggage, to be sure, but as 
slowly and sleepily as if not Liman but his ( 9 wn change of 
mind had diverted him from it. , J 

Part of thf? grounf] floor of t^e hotel was still intact and 
hrd been made faurly habitable by being boarded over at 
the tcp and sides. A notice in Turkish and French indicated 
that the hotel would be rebuilt in a short time as a more 
beautiful and more raodem structure. Yet the only sign of 
this was the work of three day laborers, who with shovels 
and rakes were heaping up the rubble at one side and load- 
ing It into a small handbarrow. 

As It turned out, part of the hotel staff, unemployed be- 
cause of the fire, was hving in these rums. A gentleman in a 
black frock coat and a bright red tie at once came running 
out when Liman’s carnage stopped, told Liman, who 
sulkily listened to him, the story of the fire, meanwhile 
mistmg the ends of his long, thin beard around his finger 
and interrupting this only to point out to Liman where the 
fire started, how it spread and how finally evctythlR^ 6bl- 
lapsed. Liman, who had hardly raised his eyes from the 
ground throughout this whole story and had not let go the 
handle of the carnage door, was just about to call out to 
'the driver the name of another hotel to which he could 
drive him^when the man m the frock coat, with arms 
raised, implored ^him not to go to any other hotel, but to 
remain loyal to this hotel, where, after all, he had always 
received satisfaction. Despite the fact that this was only 
meaningless talk and no one could remember Liman, just 
as Liman recognized hardly a single one of the male and 
female employees he saw in the door and windows, he still 
asked, as a man to whom his habits were dear, how, then, at 
the moment, he was to remain loyal to the burned down 
hotel. Now he learned— and involuntarily had to smile at 



282 


FRAN'Z KAFKA 


die idea— chat beautiful room! in private homes were avail- , 
able for formir guests of this hotel, but only for then. 
Liman need bm ray the word and he would be taken to 
oaS at once, it was quite near, there v'ould be no time lost 
and the rate— they wished to oblige and the room was ef 
course only a substitute— was unusually low, even though 
the food, Viennese cooking, was, if possible, even better 
and the service even more attentive than in the former 
Hotel Kingston, which had really been inadequate in some 
respects. . 

“Thank you,” said Liman, and got into the carriage. “I 
shall be in Constantmople only five days, I really can’t set 
myself up m a private home for this short space of time, no. 
I’m going to a hotel. Next year, however, when I return 
and your hotel has been rebuilt. I’ll certainly stop only 
with you Excuse me'” And Liman tried to close the car- 
riage door, the handle of which the representative of the 
hotel wa£ now holding. “Sir,” the latter said pleadingly, 
and lobbed up at Liman. 

“Let go'” shouted Liman, shook the door and directed 
the driver; “To the Hotel Royal.” But whether it was be- 
cause the driver did not understand him, whether it was 
because he was waiting for the door to be closed, in asy 
event he sat on his box like a statue. In no case' however, 
did the representative of the hotel let gq of the door, he 
even beckoned eagerly to a colleague to rouse himself and 
come to his aid. There was some girl he particularly hoped 
could do something, and he kept calling, “Fmi' Hey, Fini! 
Where’s FinP” The people at the windows and the door 
had turned toward the inside of the house, they shouted in 
confusion, one saw them running past the windows, every- 
one was looking for Fini. 

The man who was keeping Liman from driving off and 



DIARIES 1913 283 

whom obviously only hunger gave the courage to behave 
hlje this, could have been easily pushed away from the 
doV- Ht realized this and did not dare,e/en to look at 
Liman; but Liman had already had too many unfortunate 
experiences on his travels not to know how important it is 
in a foreign country to avoid doing anything that attracts 
attention, no matter how very much in the right one might 
be. He therefore qui^dy got out of the carriage a^ain, for 
the time bemg paid no attention to the man who was hold-, 
ing the door in a convulsive grip, went up to the driver, 
repeated his instructions, expressly added that he was to 
drive away from here as fast as he could, then walked up to 
the man at the door of the carriage, took hold of his hand 
with an apparently ordinary grip, but secretly squeezed 
the knuckles so hard that the man almost jumped and was 
forced to remove his hand from the door handle, shrieking 
which was at once a command and an outburst of 

pain. 

“Here she comes! Here she comes'” shoui^hov^tafhe 
from all the windows, and a laughing girl, her hands still 
held to her hair which had just been dressed, her head half 
bowed, came runnmg out of the house toward the car- 
riage. “Quick' Into the carriage! It’s pouring,” she cried, 
graspmg L.man by the shoulders and holdmg her face very 
close to his. “I am Fini,” she then said softly, and let her 
hands move caressingly along his shoulders. 

They really don’t mean so badly by me. Liman said to 
himself, smiling at the girl, too bad that I’m no longer a 
young fellow and don’t permit myself risky adventures. 

“There must be some mistake. Miss,” he said, and turned 
toward his carriage, “I neither asked them to call you nor 
do I intend to drive off with you.” From inside the car- 
riage he added, “Don’t trouble yourself any further.” 



284 ' FRANZ KAFKA 

But Fini had already set qne foot on the step and said, 
her arms crossed over her breast, “Now why won’t y(ju 
let me recomm^qd a place for you to stay^” ^ 

Tured of the annoyances to which he had already been 
subjected. Liman leaned out to her and said, “Please don’t 
delay me any longer with useless questions' I am going to a 
hotel and that’s all. Take your foot oif the step, otherwise 
you may be hurt. Go ahead, driver!’! 

, “Stop' ’’ the girl shouted, however, and now in earnest 
tried to swing herself into the carriage. Liman, shaking his 
head, stood up and blocked all of the door with his stout 
body. The girl tried to push him away, using her head and 
knees in the attempt, the carriage began to rock on its 
wretched springs, Liman had no real grip. 

“And why won’t you take me with you^ And why 
won’t you take me with you>’’ the girl kept repeating. 

Certainly Liman would have been able to push away the 
giil without exerting any special force, even though she 
wSs ^rroh'g, if the man in' the frock coat, who had remained 
silent until now as though he had been relieved by Fini, had 
not now, when he saw Fini waver, hurried over with a 
bound, supported Fini from behind and tried to push the 
girl into the carriage by exerting all his strength against 
Liman’s still restrained efforts at defense. Sensing that he 
was holding back, she actually forced her way into the car- 
riage, pulled at the door which at the same time was 
slammed shut from the outside, said, as though to herself, 
“Well, now,” first hastily straightened her blouse and then, 
more deliberately, her hair. “This is unheard of,” said 
Liman, who had fallen back into his seat, to the girl who 
was sitting opposite him. 

May 2. It has become very necessary to keep a diary 



DIARIES X9I3 285 

again. The uncertainty of my^ thoughts, F., the ruin in the 
office, the physical jmpossibihty of writing and the inner 
need for it. 

j 

Valh walks out through our door behind my brother-in- 
law wj^o tomorrow will leave for Czortkov for maneuvers. 
Remarkable, how much is implied m this following-after 
of a recognition of mijsriage as an institution which one has 
become thoroughly used to. ^ 

The story of the gardener’s daughter who interrupted 
my work the day before y^terday. I, who want to cure 
my neurasthenia through my work, am obliged to hear 
that the young lady’s brother, his name was Jan and he 
was the actual gardener and presumed successor of old 
Dvorsky, already even the owner of the flower garden, 
hac^ poisoned himself because of melancholia two months 
ago at the age of twenty-eight. During the summer he ffilt 
relatively well despite his solitary nature, sinc^aiTI^afriie 
had to have contact with the customers, but durmg the 
winter he was entirely withdrawn. His sweetheart was a 
clerk— Mredwme— a girl as melancholy as he. They often 
wei^t to the cemetery together. 

The gigantic Menasse at the Yiddish performance. 
Something magical that seized hold of me at his movements 
in harmony with the music. I have forgotten what. 

My stupid laughter today when I told my mother that 
I am going to Berlin at Whitsuntide. “Why are you 
laughing!* ’’ said my mother (among several other remarks, 
one of which was, “Look before you leap,” all of which, 
however, I warded off with remarks like, “It’s nothing,” 



286 


FRANZ KAFKA 


etc.). “Because of embarrassment,” I said, and was happy 
for once to have said somethmg true in this matter. 

.Yesterday met B.®® Her calmness, contentedress, cWity 
and lack of embarrassment, even tliough iii tl^e last two 
years she has become an old woman, her plumpness— even 
at that time a burden to her— that will soon have reached 
the extteme of sterile fatness, her w^lk has become a sort of 
rolhng or shuffle with the belly thrust, or rather carried, to 
the fore, and on her chin— at a quick glance only on her 
chin— hairs now curling out of what used to be down. 

May 3. The terrible uncertainty of my inner existence. 

How I unbutton my vest to show Mr. B. my rash. How 
I beckon him into another room. 

JThe leper and his wife. The way her behind— she is lymg 
in b^ ^ her belly— keeps rising up with all its ulcers again 
and ag^m although a guest is present. The way her hus- 
band keeps shoutmg at her to keep covered. 

The husband has been struck from behind by a stake- 
no one knows where it came from— knocked down^and 
pierced. Lying on the ground with his head raised and his 
arms stretched out, he laments. Later he is able to stand up 
unsteadily for a moment. He can talk about nothing except 
how he was struck, and points to the approximate direction 
from which in his opinion the stake came. This talk, always 
the same, is by now tiresome to the wife, particularly sihce 
the man is always pointing in another direction. 

May 4. Always the image of a pork butcher’s broad 
knife that quickly and with mechanical regularity chops 



DIARIES 1913 287 

^into me from the ^ide and cuts off very thin slices which 
fly off almost liket shavings because of the speed of the 
adtiipn. 

TEarly one mortung, the streets were still empty up and 
down, their length and breadth, a man, he was in his bare 
feet and wore only a nightshirt and trousers, opened the 
door of a large tenenient on the main street. He seized the 
two sections of the door and took a deep breath. “Mis* 
ery, oh, damned misery,” he said and looked, apparently 
calmly, first along the street and then at some houses. 

Despair from this direction too. Nowhere a welcome. 

I. Digestion. 2. Neurasthenia. 3. Rash. 4. Inner inse-. 
curity. 


May 24. Walk with Pick.®® In high spirits because I con- 
sider “The Stoker” so good. This evening I read' jt to my 
parents, there is no better critic than I when I read to my 
father, who listens with the most extreme reluctance. 
Many shallow passages followed by unfathomable depths. 

June 5. ’The inner advantages that mediocre literary 
works derive fropi the fact that their authors are still alive 
and present behind them. The real sense of growing old. 

Lowy, story about crossing the frontier. 

June 2 1 . The anxiety I suffer from all sides The exami- 
nation by the doctor, the way he presses forward against 
me, I virtually empty myself out and he makes his empty 
speeches into me, despised and unrefuted. 



288 


FRANZ KAFKA 


The tremendous world I have in my head. But how free 
myself and free it without bemg ton to pieces. An^ a 
thousand times rather be tom to pieces than retain it in' me 
or bury it. That, mdeed, is why I ?m here, th'at is I^uite 
clear to me. 

On a cold spring morning about five "o’clock a tall man 
in a cloak that reached to his feet knocked with his fist 
.against the door of a small hut which stood in a bare, hilly 
region. T[he moon was still white and bright in the sky. 
After each blow of his fist he hstened, within the hut 
there was silence. 

July 1 . The wish for an unthin kin g, reckless solitude. To 
be face to face only with myself. Perhaps I shall have it in 
Riva. 

t)ay before yesterday with Weiss,” author of Die Ga- 
/eerlrjewish physician, Jew of the kind that is closest to 
the type of the Western European Jew and to whom 
one therefore immediately feels close. The tremendous ad- 
vantage of Christians who always have and enjoy such 
feelings of closeness in general intercourse, for instance c 
Christian Czech among Christian Czechs. 

The honeymoon couple that came out of the Hotel de 
Saxe. In the afternoon. Dropping the card in the mailbox. 
Wrinkled clothing, lazy pace, dreary, tepid afternoon. 
Faces scarcely individualized at first sight. 

The picture of the celebration of the Romanov ter- 
centenary in Yaroslavl on the Volga. The dzar, the 
annoyed princesses standing in the sun, only one— deli- 



DIAILIES 1913 289 

cate, elderly, indolent, leaning on her parasol— is looking 
straight ahead. heir to the throne on the arm of the 
hilM, bareheaded Cossack. In another picj;ure, men who 
hading i?}nce passed by are saluting in the distance. . 

O / 

*rhe millionaire in the motion picture “Slaves of Gold.” 
Mustn’t forget turn. The calmness, the slow moverjent, 
conscious of its goal.^ a faster step when necessary, 'a shrug 
of the shoulder. Rich, spoiled, lulled to sleep, but how he 
springs up hke a servant and searches the room mto which 
he was locked in the forest tavern. 

July 2. Wept over the report of the trial of twenty- 
three-year old Marie Abraham who, because of poverty 
and hunger, strangled her not quite nine-months-old child, 
Barbara, with a man’s tie that she used as a garter. Very 
routine story. 

The fire with which, in the bathroom, I des&nbcdTif'hiy 
sister a funny motion picture. Why can I never do that in 
the presence of strangers^ 

, I would never have married a girl with whom I had 
lived in th-i same city for a year. 

July 3. The liroadening and heightening of existence 
through marriage. Sermon text. But I almost sense it. 

AVhen I say something it immediately and finally loses 
its importance, when I write it down it loses it too, but 
sometimes gains a new one. 


A band of litde golden beads around a tanned throat. 



FRANZ KAFKA 


290 

July 19. Out of a house there stepped four armed men. 
Each held a halberd upright before him.iNow and then ore 
of them looked to the rear to see whether he was com’ug 
on whose account they were standmg^here. It w*.s ear^ m 
the morning, the street was entirely empty. 

So, what do you want? Come!— We ’do not want to. 
Leave uSi— 

All the inner effort just for this! That is why the music 
from the coffeehouse rings so in one’s ear. The stone’s 
throw about which Elsa B. spoke becomes visible. 

A woman is sitting at the distaff. A man pushes the door 
open with a sword which is sheathed in its scabbard (he is 
holding it loosely in his hand). 
man: He was here' 
woiaAN: Who^ What do you want? 

horse thief. Hd is hiding here. Don’t lie! 

(He brandishes the sword.) 

WOMAN (raising the distaff to protect herself): No one 
was here. Let me alone! 

July 20. Down on the river lay several boats, 'fishermen 
had cast their lines, it was a dreary day. Some youths, their 
legs crossed, were leaning against the railing of the dock. 

When they rose to toast her departure, lifting up their 
champagne glasses, the dawn had already broken. Her palt- 
ents and several wedding guests escorted her to the car- 
riage. 


July 21. Don’t d«]^, not even over the fact that you 



^ ■'■'*' '^eir 

Qi' O .. oL Ua-^ “> 

JoU/ \t/<^“ ^ A M' <£— 

1 ■ q£v^ a.CAv fi^-^Ll/T wt'l/^(^~ /Vn^il^n^ 

^t&r ^v ^ v^ 

k^ii''^ '^ 1 ' 

T, 1\ V’CCu Uu-(/-^eXjGi h^ 

l^^/yy vwv- AeA.^'^aA. />/‘Ji^ ' 

'll /\, — 40 /VA^^O^ ^ e^v , u^A.aU s^ 

^ “"u 

i''fc' * 

^ W ^r I ' 

. v> 


o^>( 

few 



A Manuscript Page of the Diaries 



FRANZ KAFKA 


192 

first, and at once the whole , apparatus is in motion. Sub- 
ject to an incomprehensible power, aiJ the watch seeim 
subject to time, it; creaks here and there, and all the ch^iis 
clank down their prescribed path one after the olher. . 

Summaiy of all the arguments for and against my mar- 
riages 

1. Inability to endure life alone, which does not imply 
inabihty to live, qmte the contrary, it is even improbable 
that I know how to hve with anyone, but I am mcapable, 
alone, of bearmg the assault of my own life, the demands 
of my own person, the attacks of time and old age, the 
vague pressure of the desire to write, sleeplessness, the 
nearness of msamty— I cannot bear all this alone. I naturally 
add a “perhaps” to this. The connection with F. will give 
my existence more strength to resist. 

2. Everything immediately gives me pause. Every joke 
in the comic^naper, what I remember about Flaubert and 
Grillpaxzer, the sight of the nightshirts on my parents’ 
beds, laid out for the night. Max’s marriage. Yesterday my 
sister said, “All the married people (that we know) are 
happy, I don’t understand it,” this remark too gave me 
pause, I became afraid again. 

3 . 1 must be alone a great deal. What I accomplished was 
only the result of berag alone. 

4. I hate everything that does not relate to literature, 
conversations bore me (even if they relate to literature), 
to visit people bores me, the sorrows and joys of my rela- 
tives bore me to my soul. Conversations take the impor- 
tance, the seriousness, the truth out of everythmg I think 

5. The fear of the connection, of passing into Ae other. 
Then I’ll never be alone again. 

6. In the past, especially, the person I am in the company 



DIARIES 1913 > 293 ‘ 

of my sisters has been entirely different from the person I 
'am m the company of other people. Fearless, powerful, 
sujipnsmg, moved as I otherwise am only when I write. If 
throw|[h t'^^e mterme^ation of my wife I could be hke that 
in the presence of everyonel But then would it not be at 
the! ej^ense of my writmg^ Not that, not that! 

7. Alone, I cotdd perhaps some day really give up my 
job. Married, it wiUjiever be possible. 

In our class, the fifth class of the Amaha Gymnasium, 
there was a boy named Friedrich Guss whom we all hated 
very much. If we came mto the classroom early and saw 
him sitting in his place near the stove we could hardly 
understand how he could have pulled himself together to 
come to school agam. But I’m not telling it nght. We 
didn’t hate only him, we hated everyone. We were a ter- 
rible confederacy. Once, when the District School Insj^ec- 
tor was present at a lesson— it was a geograpjiy lesson and 
the professor, his eyes turned to the blackboard of the 
window like all our professors, was descnbmg the Morea 
Peninsula — 


, It, was the first day of school, evening was already ap- 
proaching.® The professors of the Obergymnasium were 
soil sitting in the staff room, studying the lists of pupils, 
preparmg new roll books, talking about their vacation - 
trips. 

Miserable creature that 1 am! 

Just whip the horse properly! Dig the spurs into him 
slowly, fhen pull them out with a jerk, but now let them 
bite into the flesh with all your strength. 



FRANZ KAFKA 


294 

What an extremity! 

I 

Were we crazy? We ran through the park at night 
swinging branches. 

I sailed in a boat into a small, natural bay. 

While I was at the Gymnasium, ncv/ and then I used to 
visit a certam Josef Mack, a friend of my dead father. 
When, aft^r graduation from the Gymnasium, I — 

While he was at the Gymnasium Hugo Seifert now and 
then used to pay a visit to a certain Josef Kiemann, an old 
bachelor who had been a friend of Hugo’s dead father. 
The visits suddenly ceased when Hugo, who received the 
offer of a job abroad which he had to accept at once, left 
his home town for several years. When he returned he in- 
teniled to visit the old man, but he found no opportunity, 
perSps^such a visit would not have suited his changed 
views, and although he often went through the street 
where Kiemann lived and several times even saw him lean- 
mg out of the window and was probably noticed by him 
too, he neglected to pay the visit. 

Nothing, nothing, nothmg. Weakness, self-destruction, 
-tip of a flame of hell piercmg the floor. 

July 23. With Felix in Rostock. The bursting sexuality 
of the women. Their natural impurity. The flirtatioh, 
senseless for me, with little Lena. The sight of a stout 
woman hunched up in a basket chair, one foot curiously 
pushed backward, who was sewing something and talking 
to an old woman, probably an old spinster, whose teeth ap- 



DIARIES 1913 295 

peared unusually large on onf side of her mouth. The fuU- 
’ bloodedness and *yisdom of the pregnant woman. Her 
behind almost faceted by evenly divided planes. The life 
on t^e sn ^1 terrace. How I coldly took the little giri on 
my lap, not at all unhappy about the coolness. 

How childishly a tinker, seen through the open dcior of 
his shop, sits at his‘ work and keeps striking with his 
hammer. 

Roskoff, “History of the Devil”: Among the present- 
day Caribs, “he who works at night” is regarded as the 
creator of the world 

August 13. Perhaps everything is now ended and the 
letter I wrote yesterday was the last one. That would cer- 
taiply be the best. What I shall suffer, what she will suffer— 
that cannofrbe compared with the common^uffering that 
would result. I shall gradually pull myself toget,her, she 
will marry, that is the only way out among the living. We 
cannot beat a path into the rock for the two of us, it is 
enough that we wept and tortured ourselves for a year. 
She, will realize this from my last letters. If not, then I will 
certainly fftarry her, for I am too weak to resist her opin- 
ion about our copimon fortune and am unable not to carry 
out, so far as I can, something she considers possible. ' - 

Yesterday evening on the Belvedere under the stars. 

August 14. The opposite has happened. There were 
three letters. The last letter I could not resist. I love her as 
far as I am capable of it, but the love lies buried to the point ^ 
of suffocation under fear and self-reproaches. 



FRANZ KAFKA 


296 

Conclusion for my case ffom The Judpnent. I am in- 
directly in her debt for the story. But Q eorg goes to pieces 
because of his fianc6e. 

Coitus as punishment for the happiness of" being to- 
gether. Live as aScetically as possible, more asceticaHy than 
a bachelor, that is the only possible way for me to endure 
marriage. But she? 

• And despite all this, if we, I and F., had equal rights, if 
we had the same prospects and possibihties, I would not 
marry. But this bhnd alley into which I havt, slowly pushed 
her life makes it an unavoidable duty for me, although its 
consequences are by no means unpredictable. Some secret 
law of human relationship is at work here. 

I had great difficulty writing the letter to her parents, 
especially because a first draft, written under particu- 
larly unfavorable circumstances, for a long time resisted 
every change Today, nevertheless, I have juss about suc- 
ceeded„at least there is no untruth in it, and after all it is 
still something that parents can read and understand. 

August 15. Agonies in bed toward morning. Saw only 
solution in jumping out of the window. My mother csmc 
to my bedside and asked whether I had sent olf the letter 
and whether it was my original text. I said it was the origi- 
nal text, but made even sharper. She said she does not 
understand me. I answered, she most certainly does not 
understand me, and by no means only in this matter. Later 
she asked me if I were going to write to Uncle Alfred,“he 
deserved it. I asked why he deserved it. He has tele- 
graphed, he has written, he has your welfare so much at 
heart. “These are simply formalities,” I said, “he is a com- 
plete stranger to me, he misunderstands me entirely, he 



DIARIES 1913 ' 297 

does not know what I want and need, I have nothing in 
'common with him‘” 

“So no one understands you,” my mother said, “I sup- 
pose .1 am p. stranger jto you too, and your father as welL ^ 
we ah' war^t only what is bad for you.” 

■"Certainly, you are all strangers to ms, we are related 
only by blood, but that never shows itself. Of courss you 
don’t want what is bid for me.” 

Through this and several other observations of myself J 
have come to believe that there are possibdities m my ever- 
increasing inn'^r decisiveness and conviction which may 
enable me to pass the test of marriage in spite of every- 
thing, and even to steer it m a direction favorable to my 
development. Of course, to a certain extent this is a belief 
that I grasp at when I am already on the window sill. 

rU shut myself off from everyone to the point of in- 
sensibility, J^ake an enemy of everyone, speak to no o3b. 

The man with the dark, stem eyes who was carrying the 
pile of old coats on his shoulder. 

f.EOPOLD s. (a tall, strong man, clumsy, jerky movements, 
looselyshanging, imtnkled, checked clothes, enters hur- 
riedly through the door on the right into the large 
room, claps his hands and shouts'). Felice! Felice! 
{Without pausing an instant for a reply to hts shout he 
hurries to the middle door which he opens, again shout- 
ing): Felice! 

FELICE s. {enters through the door at the left, stops at the 
door, a forty -year-old woman in a kitchen apron): 
Herib I am, Leo. How nervous you have become re- 
cently! What is it you want^ 



298 FRANZ KAFKA 

LEOPOLD (turns With a jerk, then stops and bites his lips): 
Well, then, come over Here! (Hejwalks over to the' 
sofa.) 

FELICE (does not move): Quick! W,hat do you want^ I 
really have to go back to the kitchen. 

LEOPOLD (from ftbe sofa) : Forget the kitchen! Come; here! 

I want to tell you somethmg important. It will make up 
for It. All right, come on! 

FELICE (walks toward him slowly, raising the shoulder 
straps of her apron): Well, what is it that’s so im- 
portant!* If you’re making a fool of me I’ll be angry, 
seriously. (Stops m front of him.) 

LEOPOLD. Well, sit down, then. 

FELICE. And suppose I don’t want to^ 

LEOPOLD. Then I can’t tell it to you. I must have you close 
tome. 

FELjcE- All right, now I am sitting. 

Auguct 21. Today I got Kierkegaard’s Buch des Rich- 
ters.^^ As I suspected, his case, despite essential differences, 
is very similar to mine, at least he is on the same side of the 
world. He bears me out hke a friend. I drafted the follow- 
ing letter to her father, which, if I have the strength, I will 
send off tomorrow. 

“You hesitate to answer my request, that is quite under- 
standable, every father would do the same in the case of 
any suitor. Hence your hesitation is not the reason for this 
letter, at most it increases my hope for a calm and correct 
judgment of it. I am writing this letter because I fear that 
your hesitation or your considerations are caused by more 
general reflections, rather than by that single passage in my 
first letter which indeed makes them necessary and which 



DIARIES 1913 299 

might have given me away. That is the passage concernmg 
I'he unbearableness of my job.* 

“You will perh^JS pass over what I say, but you 
shouldn’t, you should rather mquire mto iWery carefuljy, 
m whidh easel should carefully iind briefly have to answer 
yorfas follows. My job is unbearable to me|,because it con- 
flicts v/ith my only desire and my only calling, whifjh is 
literature. Since I aqi .nothing but literature and can and 
want to be nothing else, my job will never take possession 
of me. It may, however, shatter me completely, and this is 
by no means a remote possibility. Nervous states of the 
worst sort control me without pause, and this year of 
worry and torment about my and your daughter’s future 
has revealed to the full my inability to resist. You might 
ask why I do not give up this job and— I have no money- 
do not try to support myself by literary work. To this I 
can make only the miserable reply that I don’t have the 
strength foyt, and that, as far as I can see, I shall insteaftbe 
destroyed by this job, and destroyed quickly. 

“And now compare me to your daughter, this l^ealthy, 
gay, natural, strong girl. As often as I have repeated it to 
her in perhaps five hundred letters, and as often as she has 
qalmed me with a ‘no’ that to be sure has no very con- 
vmemg ba-^s— It nevertheless remains true that she must be 
unhappy with me, so far as I can see. I am, not only because 
of my external circumstances but even much more because 
of my essential nature, a reserved, silent, unsocial, dissatis- 
fied person, but without being able to call this my misfor- 
tu3se, for it is only the reflection of my goal Conclusions 
can at least be drawn from the sort of life I lead at home. 
Well, I live in my family, among the best and most lovable 
people, ihore strange than a stranger. I have not spoken an 
average of twenty words a day to my mother these last 



FRAKZ KAFKA 


years, hardly ever said more than hello to my father. I do 
not speak at all to my married sisters and my brothers-in- 
law, and not because I have anything against them. The 
reason for it li simply this, that I have not the shghtest 
thing to talk to them about. Everything that le not htera- 
ture bores me apd I hate it, for it disturbs me or delays me, 
if only because I think it does. I lack all aptitude for family 
life except, at best, as an observer. I have no family feehng 
and visitors make me almost feel as though I were mah- 
ciously being attacked. 

“A marriage could not change me, just as my job cannot 
change me.” 

August 30. Where am I to find salvation^* How many 
untruths I no longer even knew about will be brought to 
the surface. If they are going to per\'ade our marriage as 
they pervaded the goodbye, then I have certamly done the 
right thing. In me, by myself, without humanjelationship, 
there are no visible hes. The limited circle is pure.^® 

October 14. The little street began with the wall of a 
graveyard on the one side and a low house with a balcony 
on the other. In the house hved the pensioned oflicial. 
Friedrich Munch, and his sister, Elizabeth. 

A herd of horses broke out of the enclosure. 

Two friends went for a morning ride. 

“Devils, save me from this benightedness!” shouted an 
old merchant who had wearily lain down on the sofa in the 
evening and now, in the night, got up with difficulty only 
by calling upon all his strength. There was a hollow knock 



DIARIES 1913 ' 301 

at the door. “Come in, come m, everythhig that is outside!” 
"he shouted. 

i 

October ly. Perhaps I have caught hold of myself again, 
perhaps I o’ecretly took the shorter way agam, and now I, 
who ^Iready despair in loneliness, have pulled myself up 
again, But the Headaches, the sleeplessness! Well,j it is 
worth the struggle, icr rather, I have no choice. 

The stay in Riva was very important to me. For the first 
time I understood a Christian girl and lived almost entirely 
within the sphere of her influence. I am incapable of writ- 
ing down the important things that I need to remember. 
This weakness of mine makes my dull head clear and 
empty only in order to preserve itself, but only insofar as 
the confusion lets itself be crowded off to the periphery. 
B^t I almost prefer this condition to the merely dull and 
indefinite i^essure the uncertain release frgm whi^first 
would require a hammer to crush me. ^ 

Unsuccessful attempt to write to E. Weiss. And yester- 
day, in bed, the letter was boihng m my head. 

* ^ 

To sit ki the corner of a trolley, your coat wrapped 
around you. , 

Prof. G. on the trip from Riva. His German-Bohemian 
nose reminding one of death, swollen, flushed, pimpled 
cheeks set on the bloodless leanness of his face, the blond, 
full beard around it. Possessed by a voracious appetite and 
thirst. The gulping down of the hot soup, the biting into 
and at tlie same time the licking of the unskinned heel of 
salami, the solemn gulps of the beer grown warm, the 



FRANZ KAFKA 


302 

sweat breaking out around his nose. A loathsomeness that 
cannot be savored to the fulf even by Ae greediest staring 
and sniffing 

• « 

The house was already locked up. There was light in 
two windows on the second floor, and in one wlndo^v^ on 
the ^purth floor as well. A carriage stopped befoj'e the 
house. A young man stepped to the lighted window on the 
fourth floor, opened it and looked down mto the street. In 
the moonlight. 

It was already late in the evening. The student had lost 
all desire to continue working. Nor was it at all necessary, 
he had really made great progress the last few weeks, he 
could probably relax a little and reduce the amount of 
work he did at mght. He closed his books and noteboolcs, 
arranged everythmg on his httle table and was about to un- 
dreS and go to sleep. By accident, however, b/-looked to- 
ward the window, and 'v^hen he saw the bright full moon 
it occurred to him that he might still take a short walk in 
the beautiful fall night and somewhere or other, perhaps, 
refresh himself with a cup of black coffee. He turned out 
the lamp, took his hat and opened the door to the kitcjien- 
Usually It did not matter to him at all that he always had to 
go through the kitchen, this mconvenience also consider- 
ably reduced the rent of his room, but now and then, when 
there was an unusual amount of noise in the kitchen, or 
when, as today, he wanted to go out late in the evemng, it 
was annoying. « 

In despair. Today, in the half-sleep during the after- 
noon: In the end the pain will really burst my hdad. And 
at the temples. What I saw when I pictured this to myself 



DIARIES 1913 303 

was really a gunshot woun^, but around the hole the 
jagged edges were bent straight back, as in the case of a tin 
can violently torn open. 

Don’t forget Kropotkin! 

October 20. The unimaginable sadness in the morhing. 
In the evemng read’j'acobsohn’s Der Fall Jacobsohn. This 
strength to live, to make decisions, joyfully to set one’s 
foot in the right place. He sits m himself the way a prac- 
ticed rower sits in his boat and would sit in any boat. I 
wanted to write to him. 

Instead of which I went for a walk, erased all the emo- 
tion I had absorbed in a conversation with Haas, whom I 
had run into, women excited me, I am now reading The 
Metamorphosis at home and find it bad. Perhaps I am really 
loot, the sadness of this morning will return again, J^shall 
not be abl^b resist it for long, it deprives nse of all hope. I 
don’t even have the desire to keep a diary, perhapnbecause 
there is already too much lackmg in it, perhaps because I 
should perpetually have to describe incomplete— by all ap- 
pfearances necessarily incomplete— actions, perhaps because 
writing itself adds to my sadness. 

I would gladly write fairy tales (why do I hate the word 
so'') that could -please W. and that she might sometimes 
keep under the table at meals, read between courses and 
blush fearfully when she noticed that the sanatonum doc- 
tor has been standing behind her for a little while now and 
watching her. Her excitement sometimes— or really all of 
the time— when she hears stories. 

I notipe that I am afraid of the almost physical strain of 
the effort to remember, afraid of the pain beneath which 
the floor of the thoughtless vacuum of the mind slowly 



FRANZ KAFKA 


304 

opens up, or even merely heaves up a little in preparation.^ 
All thmgs resist being written down. <If I Icnew that her 
commandment not to menaon her were at work here (I 
havfe kept it faithfully, alpiost withaut effort), then I 
should be satisfied, but it is nothmg but inabihty. Besi 4 es, 
what am I to thifik of the fact that this evenmg, for f long 
wtuld; I was pondermg what the acquamtance with W. had 
cost me in pleasures with the Russian Woman, who at night 
perhaps (this is by no means impossible) might have let me 
mto her room, which was diagonally across from mine. 
While my evemng’s intercourse with W. was carried on in 
a language of knocks whose meaning we never definitely 
agreed upon I knocked on the ceiling of my room below 
hers, received her answer, leaned out of the window, 
greeted her, once let myself be blessed by her, once 
snatched at a ribbon she let down, sat on the wmdow sill 
for IjCK’rs, he.'ird every one of her steps above, mistakenly 
regarded everj chance Imock to be the sign di an under- 
standmgs heard her coughmg, her singing before she fell 
asleep. 

October 21. Lost day. Visit to the Ringhoffer factory, 
Ehrenfels’ seminar, at Weltsch’s, dinner, walk, now here at 
ten o’clock. I keep thmking of the black beetle,®^ but will 
not write. 

In the small harbor of a fishing village a bark was being 
fitted out for a voyage. A young man in wide sailor pa^its 
was supervising the work. Two old sailors were carrying 
sacks and chests to a gangplank where a tall man, his legs 
spread wide, took everything and handed it oyer into 
hands that stretched toward him from the dark interior of 
the bark. 'On the large, square-hewn stones enclosing a 



DIARIES 1913 305 

comer of the dock, half reclining, sat live men, they blew 
the smoke of their ppes in all directions. From time to time 
the man In th$ widfe sailor pants went up to them, made a 
little si^eech, fjnd slapped them on the Imees Usually a wine 
jug^was brought out from behmd a stone in whose shade it 
was kspt, and a glass of opaque red wme passed from man 
to man. 

October 22. Tqo late. The sweemess of sorrow and of 
love. To be smded at by her in the boat. Th^ was most 
beautiful of all. Always only the desire to die and the not- 
yet-yieldmg; this alone is love. 

Yesterday’s observation. The most appropriate situation 
for me: To hsten to a conversation between two people 
who are discussing a matter that concerns them closely 
while I have only a very remote interest m it whi<j^is in 
addition c^toipletely selfless. 

October 26. The family sat at dinner. Through the un- 
curtained wmdows one could look out into the tropic 
iiight. 

“Who am I, then^” I rebuked myself. I got up from the 
sofa upon which>I had been lying with my knees drawn up, 
and sat erect. The door, which led straight from the stair-* 
way into my room, opened and a young man with a bowed 
h^d and searching eyes entered. He walked, as far as this 
was possible in the narrow room, in a curve around the 
sofa and stopped in the darkness of the comer near the 
windo^y. I wanted to see what kind of apparition this was, 
went over and grasped the man by the arm. He was a 
living person. He looked up— a little shorter thin I— at me 



FKANZ KAFKA 


306 

with a smile, the very carcl^ness with which he nodded 
and said “Just try me” should have cocvinced me. Despite 
that, I seized h\n), in front by the vest and ip back by the 
jacket and shook him. His beautiful, ■>strong* ^old ^vatch 
chain attracted my attention, 1 grabbed it and pulled dqwn 
on it so that the •buttonhole to v hich it was fastened tore. 
He fwt up with this, simply looked down at the damage, 
tried m vam to keep the vest button ih the tom buttonhole. 
“What are you domg^” he said finally, and showed me the 
vest. “Just Jie quiet'” I said threatcmngly. 

I began to run around the room, from a walk I passed 
into a trot, from a trot into a gallop, every time I passed the 
man I raised my fist to him. He did not even look at me but 
worked on his vest. I felt very free, even my breathing was 
extraordinary, my breast felt that only my clothes pre- 
vented it from heaving gigantically. 

For many ironths Wilhelm Menz, a boolfiCeeper, had 
been intfnding to accost a girl whom he used regularly to 
meet on the way to the office in the mornmg on a very long 
street, sometimes at one pomt, sometimes at another. He 
had already become reconciled to the fact that this would:- 
remain an intention— he was not very bold in the presence 
of women and besides, the morning was not a propitious 
time to speak to a girl who was in a hurry— when it hap- 
pened that one evening, about Christmas time, he saw the 
girl walking right in front of him. “Miss,” he said. She 
turned, recognized the man whom she always encountered 
in the morning, without stopping let her eye rest on him 
for a moment, and since Menz said nothing further, turned 
away again. They were in a brightly lit street in tlje midst 
of a great crowd of people and Menz was able, without 



DIARIES 19IJ 307 

attracting attention, to step-up quite close to her. In this 
moment of decisicn Menz could think of nothing to say, 
but he Ivas j;esolv*ed to remain a stranger to the girl no 
longer, foij; )ie defiAitely intended to carry farther some- 
thing begun so seriously, and so he made bold enough to 
tug a1 the bottom of the gml’s jacket. The'girl suffered it as 
though nothing had happened. 

November 6. , Whence the sudden confidence^ If it 
would only remain! If I could go in and out 0^ every door 
in this way, a passably erect person. Only I don’t know 
, whether I want that. 

We didn’t want to tell our parents anything about it, but 
every evemng after nine o’clock we met, I and two cousins, 
near the cemetery fence at a place where a little rise in the 
ground provided a good view. 

The ir 3 li^ fence of the cemetery leaved a large, grass- 
grown place free on the left. 

November 17. Dream: On arising way, beginning at the 
litf t when seen from below, there lay, about at the middle of 
’the^lope and mostly in the road, a pile of rubbish or solidly 
packed clay that had crumbled lower and lower on the 
right while on the left it stood up as tall as the palings of a 
fence. I walked on the right where the way was almost 
clear and saw a man on a tricycle coming toward me from 
bdow and apparently riding straight at the obstacle. He 
was a man who seemed to have no eyes, at least his eyes 
looked like holes that had been effaced. The tricycle was 
rickety, and went along in an uncertain and shaky fashion, 
but nevertheless without a sound, with almost exaggerated 



308 I FBANZ KAFKA 

quietness and ease. I seized the man at the last moment, held 
him«s though he were the handle bars> of his vehicle and 
guided the latter mto the gap through which I hdd come. 
Th6n he fell toward me, I was as largo- as a gia^t no^v and 
yet had an awlcward hold on him, besides, the vehicle, as 
though out of cbntrol, began to move backward, e^^'en if 
slowly, and pulled me after it. We went past an open van on 
which a numberof people werestandinj^ crowded together, 
ail dressed in dark clothes, among them a boy scout wearing 
a hght-gray hat with the brim turned up I expected this 
boy, whom I had already recognized at some distance, to 
help me, but he turned away and squeezed himself in among 
the people. Then, behind this open van— the tricycle kept 
rollmg on and I, bent low, with legs astraddle, had to follow 
—there came toward me someone who brought me help, 
but whom I cannot remember. I only know that he was a 
trustjjorthy person who is now concealing himself ^ as 
though behind 'a black cloth curtain and wh^se conceal- 
ment I should respect. 

November i8. 1 will write again, but how many doubts 
have I meanwhile had about my writing. At bottom I am ^ 
incapable, ignorant person who, if he had not been cam- 
pelled— without any effort on his own part and scarcely 
aware of the compulsion— to go to school, would be fit only 
to crouch in a kennel, to leap out when food is oflFered him 
and to leap back when he has swallowed it. 

Two dogs in a yard into which the sun shone hotly ran 
toward each other from opposite directions. 

Worried and slaved over the beginning of a letter to 
MissBl. ‘ 



DIARIES 1913 309* 

November 19. The reading of the diLy moves me. Is it 
because I no longir have the slightest confidence now? 
Everythibg appeal^ to me to be an artificial construcaon 
of the min^., Every remark by someone else, every chance 
look throws everything m me over on the other side, even 
what "jas been forgotten, even what is entirely insignificant. 
I am more uncertain than I ever was, I feel only the power 
of life. And I am sdiAelessly empty. I am really hke a lost 
sheep in the nigb,t and in the mountams, or hke a sheep 
which is running after this sheep. To be so lost^pd not have 
the strength to regret it. 

I intentionally walk through the streets where there are 
whores. Walking past them excites me, the remote but 
nevertheless existent possibihty of going with one. Is that 
grossness^ But I know no better, and doing this seems 
basically innocent to me and causes me almost no rsgret. I 
want onlyTIie stout, older ones, with outmoTied clothes that 
have, however, a certain luxuriousness because of various 
adornments. One woman probably knows me by now. I 
met her this afternoon, she was not yet in her working 
v-Inthes, her hair was still flat against her head, she was 
Vearing no hat, a work blouse like a cook’s, and was carry- 
ing a bundle of some sort, perhaps to the laundress. No one 
would have found anything exciting in her, only I. We 
looked at each other fleetingly. Now, in the evening, it had 
meanwhile grown cold, I saw her, wearing a tight-fitting, 
yellowish-brown coat, on the other side of the narrow 
street that branches off from Zeltnerstrasse, where she has 
her beat. I looked back at her twice, she caught the glance 
too, but then I really ran away from her. 

This uncertainty is surely the result of thinkiri^ about F. 



FRANZ KAFKA 


310 

November 20. Was at the movies. “Lolotte.” The good ^ 
minister. The httle bicycle. The reconciliation of the par- 
ents. Was treme^ously entertamed. Bl:fore.'it, a ‘sad film, 
“The Accident on the Dock,” after it; the ga)s “A^ne at 
Last.” Am entirely empty and insensible, the passing troyey 
has more livmg ftelmg. 

November 21. Dream- The French ‘'cabinet, four men, 
i?sitang around a table. A conference is raking place. I re- 
member the, man sittmg on the long right side of the table, 
with his face fic-ttened out in profile, yellowish colored skin, 
his very straight nose juttmg far forward (jutting so far 
forward because of the flatness of his face) and an oily, 
black, heavy mustache arching over his mouth. 

Miserable observation which again is certainly the result 
of something artificially constructed whose lower end is 
swinging in em'ptiness sopiewhere When I picked up the 
inkwell from the desk to carry it into the living room I felt 
a sort of firmness in me, just as, for instance, the corner 
of a tall building appears in the mist and at once disappears 
again. I did not feel lost, something waited in me that w^ 
independent of people, even of F. What would happeif if I 
were to run away, as one sometimes runs through the 
fields? 

These predictions, this imitating of models, this fear of 
something definite, is ridiculous. These are constructions 
that even in the imagination, where they are alone sov- 
ereign, only approach the living surface but then are al- 
ways suddenly driven under. M^o has the magic ,hand to 
thrust into the machinery without its being tom to pieces 
and scattered by a thousand knives? 



OIARISS 1913 ' Jill 

I am on the hunt for constructions. 3 come into a rqom 
'and find them whitely mergikg in a corner. 

November 24. Evening before last at m'&’s. He is becpm- 
ing mOre add more a stranger, he has often been one to me, 
noA^ I^am becoming one to him too. Yesteijday evening sim- 
ply went to bed." 

A dream toward.naoming. I am sitting in the g'arden of 
a sanatorium at a long table, at the very head, and m tlje 
dream I actually see my back. It is agloomyday.Imusthave 
gone on a trip and am in an automobile that^nved a short 
time ago, drivmg up m a curve to the front of the platform. 
They are just about to bring in the food when I see one 
of the waitresses, a young, dehcate girl wearing a dress 
the color of autumn leaves, approaching with a very light 
or unsteady step through the pillared hall that served as 
the porch of the sanatorium, and going down into the gar- 
den. I dShit yet know what she wants but nfyertheless^point 
questiomngly at myself to learn whether she Avants me And 
in fact she brings me a letter. I think, this can’t be the letter 
I’m expecting, it is a very thm letter and a strange, thin, 
nqsure handwriting. But I open it and a great number of 
<thir, sheets covered Avith writing come out, all of them in 
the strange! handAvriting. I begm to read, leaf through the 
pages and recogqize that it must be a very important letter 
and apparently from F.’s youngest sister. I eagerly begin to 
read, then my neighbor on the right, I don’t know whether 
man or woman, prcibably a child, looks down over my arm 
affhe letter. I scream, “No'” The round table of nervous 
people begins to tremble I have probably caused a disaster. 

I attempt to apologize Avith a few hasty words in order to 
be able *to go on with the reading. I bend over my letter 
again, only to wake up without resistance, as if «aAvakened 



FRANZ KAFKA 


fgiz 

by,my own screarfi. With complete awareness I force my- 
self to fall asleep again, the scene reappq;^rs, in fact I quickly 
read two or three more misty lines of tte letter, nothing of 
which I remember, and lose the dream, in further sleep. 

The old merchant, a huge man, his knees giving Ayay be- 
neath him, mounted the stairs to his room, not holding the 
hamster but rather pressing against it With his hand. He was 
about to take his keys out of his trouser pocket, as he al- 
ways did, in front of the door to the room, a latticed glass 
door, when h'y noticed in a dark comer a young man who 
now bowed. 

“Who are you? What do you want?” asked the mer- 
chant, still groaning from the exertion of the climb. 

“Are you the merchant Messner?” the young man asked. 

“Yes,” said the merchant. 

“Tlien I have some information for you. Wh - I aril is 
really beside tlfie point h'ere, for I myself have no part at 
all in the' matter, am only delivenng the message. Neverthe- 
less I will introduce myself, my name is Kette and I am a 
student.” 

“So,” said Messner, considermg this for a moment 
“Well, and the message?” he then said. i a 

“We can discuss that better in your room,” said the 
student. “It is something that can’t be disposed of on the 
stairs.” 

“I didn’t know that I was to receive any such message,” 
said Messner, and looked out of the corner of his eye af^e 
floor. 

“That may be,” said the student. 

“Besides,” said Messner, “it is past eleven o’clock now, 
no one wdl overhear us here.” 



DIARIES 1913 31^ 

“No,” the student replied, “it is impassible for me to_say 
’it here.” > 

“And I,” said Mpssner, “do not receive guests at night,” 
and he stuck ‘the l^ey into the lock so violently that^the 
other Jeys M the bunch contmued to jingle for a while. 

“Now look. I’ve been waiting here sii^ce eight o’clpck, 
three Kours,” said the student. 

“That only proves, that the message is important to you. 
But I don’t want to receive any messages. Every message 
that I am spared is a gain, I am not curious, only go, go.” 
He took the student by his thin overcoat and' pushed him 
away a little. Then he opened the door part way and tre- 
mendous heat flowed from the room into the cold hall. 
“Besides, is it a business message’” he asked further, when 
he was already standing m the open doorway. 

“That too I cannot say here,” said the student. 

“Then I wish you good mght,” said Messner, went into 
his rooil?,-k)f]ked the door with the key, turned on tfie light 
of the electric bed lamp, filled a 'femall glass at a httle wall 
cabinet in which were several bottles of liquor, emptied it 
with a smack of his lips and began to undress. Leaning back 
ao-^inst the high pillows, he was on the point of beginning 
ito r,fad a newspaper when it seemed to him that someone 
was knocking softly on the door. He laid the newspaper 
back on the bed cover, crossed his arms and listened. And 
in fact the knock was repeated, very softly and as though 
down very low on the door. “A really impertinent puppy,” 
laughed Messner. When the knocking stopped, he again 
picked up the newspaper. But now the knocking came 
more strongly, there was a real banging on the door. The 
knocking came the way children at play scatter their 
knocks bver the whole door, now down low, dull against 
the wood, now up high, clear against the glass. “I,sh^ have 



FRANZ KAFKA 


to get up,” Alessnnr thought, shaking his head. “I can’t 
telephone the housekeeper because the instrument is over 
there in the anteroom and I should have to wake the land- 
ladjf to get to it 'There’s nothmg else I can do except to 
throw the boy down the stairs myself.” He pulled a felt 
cap over his hea;d, threw back the cover, pulled himself 
to th^ edge of the bed with his weight on his hands, slowly 
put his feet on the floor and pulled on high, quilted slippers. 
“Well now,” he thought, and, chewing his upper hp, stared 
at the door, “now it is qmet again. But 1 must have peace 
once and for all,” he then said to himself, pulled a stick with 
a horn knob out of a stand, held it by the middle and went 
to the door, 

“Is anyone still out there^” he asked through the closed 
door. 

“Yes,” came the answer. “Please open the door for me.” 

“I’ll open It,” said Messner, opened the door and stepped 
out holding thf stick. ' ® 

“Don’t hit me,” said thd student threateningly, and took a 
step bacltward. 

“Then go'” said Messner, and pointed his index finger m 
the direction of the stairs. 

“But I can’t,” said the student, and ran up to Messner'sq 
surprisingly — 

November 27. 1 must stop without actually being shaken 
off. Nor do I feel any danger that I might get lost, still, I 
feel helpless and an outsider. The firmness, however, which 
the most insignificant writing brings about in me is beybnd 
doubt and wonderful. The comprehensive view I had of 
everything on my walk yesterday! 

TheAshild of the housekeeper who opened the gate. Bun- 



DIARIES 1913 315, 

died up in a woman’s old shawl, pale, numb, fleshy little 
face. At mght is carried to the'gate like that by the house- 
keeper. 

The libusekeeper’s poodle that sits downstairs on a step 
and listens when I begin trampmg down from the fourth 
floor, looks at me Vhen I pass by. Pleasant feeling of in- 
timacy, since he is n®t" frightened by me and includes me 
in the famihar house and its noise. 


Picture' Baptism of the cabin boys wheq^CTOssing the 
equator. The sailors lounging around. The ship, clambered 
over in every direction and at every level, everywhere pro- 
vides them with places to sit. The tall sailors hanging on the 
ship’s ladders, one foot in front of the other, pressing their 
powerful, round shoulders agamst the side of the ship and 
looking down on the play. 

A small romn. elsa and gertrud "are sitting at the njindow 
uoith their needlework. It is beginning to get dark. 

E; Someone is rmgmg. (Both listen.) 

G. l^as there really a ring? I didn’t hear anything, I keep 
• hp,aring less all the time. 

E: It was juSt very low. (Goes into the anteroom to open 
the door. A /eiy words are exchanged. Then the voice.) 
e: Please step in here. Be careful not to stumble. Please 

walk ahead, there’s only my sister in the room. 

* 

Recently the cattle dealer Morsin told us the following 
story. He was still excited when he told it, despite the fact 
that the matter is several months old now: 

“I very often have business in the city, on the average it 
certainly comes to ten days a month. Since I mujt Usually 



FRANZ KAFKA 


,316 

s^cnd the night there too, and have always tried, whenever 
It IS at all possible, to avoid '^topping at a hotel, I rented’a 
private room that simply — ” 

, December 4. Viewed fi^om the outside it isS.err:ble for a 
y9ung but matjire person to die, or worse, to kill hifnself 
Hopelessly to depart m a complete confusion that would 
make sCnse only within a further development, or with the 
sole hope that in the great account this appearance in life 
will be considered as not having taken place Such would 
be my ph^^ now. To die would mean nothing else than 
to surrender a nothing to the nothing, but that would be 
impossible to conceive, for how could a person, even only 
as a nothing, consciously surrender himself to the nothing, 
and not merely to an empty nothing but rather to a roaring 
nothing whose nothingness consists only in its incompre- 
hensibihtv. 

A group of men, masfers and servants, Roughhewn faces 
signing with livmg colors The master sits down and the 
servant brings him food on a tray. Between the two there 
is no greater difference, no difference of another cate^ry 
than, for instance, that between a man who as a res,'ilt cf 
countless circumstances is an Englishman and lives in Lon- 
don, and another who is a Laplander and at the very same 
mstant is saihng on the sea, alone in his boat during a storm. 
Certainly the servant can— and this only under certain con- 
ditions— become a master, but this question, no matter how 
it may be answered, does not change anything her^ for 
this is a matter that concerns the present evaluation of a 
present situation. 

i 

Th^unity of mankind, now and then doubted, even if 



DIARIES 1913 

only emotionally, by everyone, even bythe most approach- 
able and adaptable , person, esh the other hand also reveals 
Itself to everyone, pr seems to reveal itself, in the complete 
harmony, discermbie time and again, between the develop- 
ment df mankind as a whole knd of the individual man. 
Eveh in the most secret emotions of the individual. 

J 

The fear of folly., To see folly in every emotion that 
strives ‘straight ahead and makes one forget everything else. 
What, then, is noh-folly^ Non-folly is to stand like a beg- 
gar before the threshold, to one side of the entrance, to rot 
and collapse. But P. and O. are really d^usting fools. 
There must be follies greater than those who perpetrate 
them. What is disgusting, perhaps, is this puffing-them- 
selves-up of the little fools in their great folly. But did not 
Christ appear in the same light to the Pharisees^ 

Word,f£ful, entirely self-contradictory idea that some- 
one who died at 3 a m., for instance, immediately there- 
after, about dawn, enters mto a higher life. W^hat in- 
compatibility there is between the visibly human and 
everything else' How out of one mystery there always 
comes a greater one' In the first moment the breath leaves 
theliumaij, calculator. Really one should be afraid to step 
out of one’s house. 

December 5. How furious I am with my mother! I need 
only begin to talk to her and I am irritated, almost scream. 

O. is really suffering and I do not believe that she is suf- 
fermg, that she is capable of suffering, do not believe it in 
the face of my knowing better, do not beheve it in order 
not to liave to stand by her, which I could not do, for she 
irritates me too. 



FRANZ KAFRA 


>518 

Externally I see "only Lttle details of F., at least some- 
times, so few they may be counted. By, these her picture is 
made clear, pure,^original, distmct and lofty, all at once. 

1 

December 8. Artificial constructions in Weiss’^ novel. 
The strength to«abolish them, the duty to do so. I jlmost 
deny experience I want peace, step by step or runmng, but 
not calculated leaps by grasshoppers. 

December 9. Weiss’s Galeere. Weakening of the effect 
when ±e en^f the story begins. The world is conquered 
and we have watched it with open eyes. We can therefore 
quietly turn away and live on. 

Hatred of aedve introspection. Explanations of one’s 
soul, such as; Yesterday I was so, and for this reason, today 
I am so j and for this reason. It is not true, not for this reason 
and not for that reason, and therefore also net ao and so. 
To put vp with oneself calmly, without being precipitate, 
to live as one must, not to chase one’s tail like a dog. 

I fell asleep in the underbrush. A noise awakened ma»I 
found in my hands a book in which I had previously been^ 
reading. I threw it away and sprang up. It was shortly after 
midday, in front of the hill on which I stood there lay 
spread out a great lowland with villages and ponds and 
uniformly shaped, tall, reed-like hedges between them. I 
put my hands on my hips, examined eVerything with my 
eyes, and at the same time hstened to the noise 

December 10. Discoveries have forced themselves on 
people.^ 



DIARIES 1913 ' 3 ^ 

The laughing, boyish, sly, revealing face of the chief 
‘inspector, a face that I havii never before seen him wear 
and noticed only rpday at the moment when I was reading 
him a report by t^e director and happerted to glance up 
from iS. Ai the same time he also stuck his right hand into 
hisbrpuser pocket with a shrug of his shoulder as though he 
were another persoa 

O 1 

It IS never possible to take note of and evaluate all tjie 
circumstances that influence the mood of the moment, are 
even at work within it, and finally are at work'in the evalua- 
tion, hence it is false to say that I felt resolute yesterday, 
that I am in despair today. Such differentiations only prove 
that one desires to influence oneself, and, as far removed 
from oneself as possible, hidden behind prejudices and 
fantasies, temporarily to create an artificial hfe, as some- 
times someone in the corner of a tavern, sufliciently con- 
cealed 'fatiiind a small glass of whiskey, entirely alone with 
himself, entertains himself with nothing but false^ unprov- 
able imagimngs and dreams. 

. .Toward midnight a young man in a tight, pale-gray, 

’ checked overcoat sprinkled with snow came down the 
stairs into-the little music hall. He paid his admission at the 
cashier’s desk behind which a dozing young lady stmed 
up and looked straight at him with large, black eyes, and 
then he stopped for a moment to survey the hall lying three 
steps below him. ■' 

Almost every evening I go to the railroad station, today, 
because it was raining, I walked up and down the hall there 
for half an hour. The boy who kept eating candy from the 



FRANZ KAFKA 


slot-machine. His Feaching into his pocket, out of which 
he pulls a pile of change, thdi careless dropping of a com' 
into the slot, reading the labels while he .eats, the dropping 
of spme pieces i?fhich he picks up from the dirty floor and 
sticks right into his mouth The man, calmly chlwul^, who 
IS speaking confidentially at the window with a wogifn, a 
relatiw. 

.December ii. In Toynbee Hall read the beginning of 
Michael Kohlhaas. Complete and utter fiasco. Badly chosen, 
badly presei^jli finally swam senselessly' around in the 
text. Model audience. Very small boys in the front row. 
One of them tries to overcome his innocent boredom by 
carefully throwing his cap on the floor and then carefully 
picking it up, and then again, over and over. Since he is too 
small to accomplish this from his seat, he has to keep sliding 
off the chair a little. Read wildly and badly and carelessly 
and unintelhgikly. And m the afternoon I already 
trembling with eagerness' to read, could hardly keep my 
mouth shut. 

No push IS really needed, only a withdrawal of the list 
force placed at my disposal, and I fall into a despair «hat ' 
rips me to pieces Today, when I imagined that I would 
certamly be calm during the lecture, I asked myself what 
sort of calm this would be, on what it would be based, and 
I could only say that it would merely be a calm for its own 
sake, an incomprehensible grace, nothihg else. 

December 12. And in the morning I got up relatively 
qmte fresh. 

Yesterday, on my way home, die litde boy bun^dled in 
gray wh\) was running along beside a group of boys, hitting 



DIARIES >1913 32^ 

himself on the thigh, catching hold of another boy with his 
other hand and shouting— rather absentmmdedly, which I 
must not forget— ‘‘Dwer to bylo docela hezky'" [Very 
mcely done today]„“ 

The. freshness with which, after a somewhat altered.di- 
vision of the day, f walked along the street about six o’clock 
today. Ridiculous observation, when will I g^t rid of this 
habit. 

I looked^closely at myself in the mirrt^ awhile ago— 
though only by artificial light and with the light commg 
from behind me, so that actually only the down at the edges 
of my ears was illuminated— and my face, even after fairly 
close examination, appeared to me better than I know it to 
be. A clear, well-shaped, almost beautifully outlined face. 
Tl\e black of the hair, the brows and the eye sockets stand 
livingl)? lorrh from the rest of the passive njass. The glance 
IS by no means haggard, there is no trace of that, but neither 
IS It childish, rather unbelievably energetic, but perhaps 
only because it was observing me, since I was just then ob- 
serving myself and wanted to frighten myself. 

. DecemlVer 12. Yesterday did not fall asleep for a long 
time. F B. Finally decided— and with that I fell uncertamly 
asleep— to ask Weiss to go to her office with a letter, and to 
write nothing else in this letter other than that I must have 
news from her or about her and have therefore sent Weiss 
there so that he might wnte me about her. Meanwhile 
Weiss IS sitting beside her desk, waits until she has fimshed 
reading the letter, bows, and— since he has no further in- 
structions and it is highly unhkely diat he will receive an 
answer— leaves. 



FRAN.Z KAFKA 


.3“ 

Discussion eveqing at the officials’ club. I presided. 
Funny, what sources of self^-respect one can draw upon. 
My introductory sentence “I must begin the discussion 
this evenmg with a regret that it is taking place.” For I was 
not advised m time and therefore not prepared. 

December 14.' Lecture by Beermann. Nothing, bSit pre- 
sentecl ^vith a self-satisfaction that is here and there con- 
tagious. Girlish face with a goiter. Before almost every 
sentence the same contraction of muscles in his face as in 
sneezing. A jferse from the Christmas Fair m his newspaper 
column tod^. 

Sir, buy it for your little lad 
So he’ll laugh and not be sad. 

Quoted Shaw. “I am a sedentary, fainthearted civilian.” 

Wre/Le a letter to F. in the office. 

< 

The fright this morning on the way to the office when I 
met the girl from the seminar who resembles F., for the 
moment did not know who it was and simply saw that she 
resembled F., was not F., but had some sort of further fe- 
lationship to F. beyond that, namely this, that in° the 
seminar, at the sight of her, I thought of F. a great deal. 

Now read in Dostoevsky the passage that reminds me so 
of my “being unhappy.” 

v. 

When I put my left hand inside my trousers while I was 
reading and felt the lukewarm upper part of my thigh. 

December 15. Letters to Dr. Weiss and Uncle ‘Alfred. 
No telegfpjn 


came. 



.DIARIB5 19*3 ' J»33 j 

Read Wir ]ungen von Again read with sup- 

pressed sobs of the victori'ts and scenes of enthusiasm. To 
be a father and ijpeak calmly to one’s son For this, how- 
ever, one shouldii’t have a little toy hatftmer in place of a 
heari-o 

“Have you written to your uncle yet?” my 'mother 
asked me, as I had?»maliciously been expecting' for some 
time.' She had long been watchmg me with concern, »for 
various reasons did not dare m the first place to ask me, and 
in the secmnd place to ask me m front of.jii^ father, and at 
last, in her concern when she saw that I was about to leave, 
asked me nevertheless. When I passed behind her chair 
she looked up from her cards, turned her face to me with 
a long-vanished, tender motion somehow revived for the 
moment, and asked me, lookmg up only furtively, smiling 
shyly and already humbled in the asking of the./juestion, 
beforS any,answer had been received. >> 

> 

December i6. “The thundering scream of the seraphim’s 
delight.” 

T, sat in the rocking chair at Weltsch’s, we spoke of the 
^disorder bf our lives, he always with a certain confidence 
(“One must want the impossible”), I without it, eying my ^ 
fingers with the feeling that I was the representative of my 
inner emptiness, an emptiness that replaces everything else 
and is not even very great. 

December 17. Letter to W. commissioning him “to 
overflow and yet be only a pot on the cold hearth.” 


Lecture by Bergmann, “Moses and the PrtS^t.” Pure 



FRANZ KAFKA 


314 

impression —In any event I have nothing to do with it. 
The truly terrible paths between freedom and slavery 
cross each other with no gmde to the wjiy ahead and ac- 
companied by an immediate obhterating-of those paths al- 
ready traversed. There are “a countless numb'eS" off such 
paths, or only one, it cannot be determined, for there is^io 
vantage. ground from which to observe. There am 1. 1 can- 
not leave. I haye nothing to complain about. I do not suffer 
excessively, for I do not suffer consistently, it does not pile 
up, at least I do not feel it for the time being, and the de- 
gree of my si^^mg is far less than the suffering that is 
perhaps my due. 

The silhouette of a man who, his arms half raised at dif- 
ferent levels, confronts the thick mist in order to enter it. 

The good, strong way m which Judaism separate 
things. There is aoom there for a person. One gee? oneself 
better, oi^ judges oneself better. 

December i8 . 1 am going to sleep, I am tired. Perhaps it 
has already been decided there. Many dreams about it. 

December 19. Letter fr6m F. Beautiful *lnoming,» 
^ warmth in my blood. 

December 20. No letter. 

The effect of a peaceful face, calm speech, especii^y 
when exercised by a strange person one hasn’t seen 
through yet. The voice of God out of a human mouth. 

t 

An old^nfan walked through the streets in the mist one 



DIARIEJ 1913 

Winter evening. It was icy cold. The streets were enyty. 
No one passed nea;: him, or^y now and then he saw in the 
distance, half conpealed by the mist, a tall policeman or a 
woman in furs or sSiawls Nothmg troubldd him, he merely 
intenc&d th visit a friend at ^^'hose house he had not been 
for\ jong time and who had )ust now sejjt a servant girl to 
him to come. 

It was long past midnight when there came a soft knock 
on the door of the room of the merchant Messner. It wasn’t 
necessary^jo wake him, he fell asleep on]y Upward mom- 
mg, and until that time he used to lie awake in bed on his 
belly, his face pressed into the pillow, his arms extended 
and his hands clasped over his head. He had heard the 
knocking immediately. “Who is it?” he asked. An indis- 
tinct murmur, softer than the knocking, replied. “T^c 
dqpr is open,” he said, and turned on the electric; hght. A 
small, deiicitc woman in a largc^gray shaM entered. 




KOTES 


1 A nieinbbr of the Russian Ballet during its guest appearance 
at the German theater in Prague. 

2 This remark is connected with the entry of December i6, 
I'pio,’ concermng pefhart Hauptmann’s comedy^ Jungfem 
vom ^hchofsberg. 

3 Ka^a was tweiity-eight years old at the time. 

4 Tlie story “Unhappiness,” from Meditation, follows here, 
without ride. This particular draft breaks o^ Several hnes be- 
fore the end. Only a title, “The Little Dweller in the Ruins,” 
follows on a fresh page, this, apparently, is related to the pre- 
ceding fragments of Kafka’s critique of his education. The 
fragments that now follow form a mosaic diflScult to arrange, 
since many things are repeated several times. The tale begins 
over and over again with the same words, and ripples of it are 
still to be seen in 1911. 

^hPwho^ has many points of contact wi^ several Chapters 
of “Description of a Struggle,” cf. especially that part of it 
called “Conversation with the Supplicant.” See also Ae sketch, 
“Unmas^mg a Confidence Trickster,” from Meditation. 

5 The poet Paul Claudel, who at that time was the French con- 
s’:! in Prague. Kafka never met him. 

6 Raul Wiegler, the translator of Moraines legendaires by 
Jules Laforgue. The reading of this translauon (and later of 
tile origmal as well) was an important experience for Kafka 
andihe Editor. ^ 

7 Kafka was survived by three sisters. All three sisters, includ- 
ing Kafka’s favorite, Otda, and the larger part of their famihes, 
wy:e killed by the if^azis. 

8 Oscar Baum, the blmd author of Das Volk des harten 
Schlafes, one of the closest friends of Kafka and the Editor. 

9 The paragraph endmg at this point was crossed out by 
Kafka.o 

10 A remimscence of the journey to Paris during^the previous 
year (1910). 



NOTES 


j I The title (Wie erlangt man Erkenntmsje der hoberen Wel- 
tenyoi a book by Dr. Rudolf Steiner. 

12 Another fragment of the story begun ou p. 22. 

13 The diary of thg Lugano-Ej-lenbach-Pa ns journey follows 
at tlus point in the manuscript. It will be 'pubhshed, together 
with the other travel ]ournals,'at the end of the seebnd '/olume 
of the Dianes 

* f ( 

14 Thij entry is connected with the plan tliat Kafka and the 
Editor developed, durmg the Lugano-]^ rlepbach-Pans trip, to 
write together the novel, “Richard and Samuel,” one chapter 
of which has been preserved under the titlr, “Die erste lange 
Eisenbahnfahrt.” 

15 Longen is ^le biographer of Jaroslav Hasek, author of The 
Good Soldier Schweik. 

16 The prayer that opens the service on the Day of Atone- 
ment. 

17 A Yiddish theater troupe from Eastern Europe The troupe 
performed in a small cafe. Another troupe had performed in 
tl^e same cafe in 1910. 

18 “The Apostate.” It is probably not unjustified to see in the 
two figures described here, who act as a sort of chprus, tue first 
sketch of the two “assistants” m The Castle. 

19 A CzeLh folk dance. 

20 Mezuzah (“doorpost”), a small roll of parchment inscribed 
with certam biblical verses (Deut. 6 4-9,11,20) and encased in 
a small wood or metal box. It hangs on the doorpost of t^e 
home of every orthodox Jew. 

21 Prelimmary work on the novel, “Richard and Samuel.” R. 
is the woman who appears in the first chapter as Dora Lippert. 

22 The Czech word pavlac means “balcony” and has passed 
into the German of Prague and Vienna. It refers to the char- 
acteristic open balcony running the entire length of an upper 
story on the side of a house facmg the court. 

23 Kafka was actually twenty-eight years old at the time. 

24 Otto Brod, the writer and brother of the Editor. The three 
of us took a trip together to Riva and Brescia in 1909. Otto 
Brod, his wife and child were murdered by the Na^ m 1944* 

25 The Editor’s future wife. 



NO)TES ^9 

26 A novel by Wilhelm Schafer. Kafk%had a great deal of td- 
spect for this writer. He later went over to the Nazis. ’ , 

27 One of Kafka V sisters. 

28 A rough jtranL^ation of the Yiddish vijould be “crazy hot- 
head.” 

29 “Dnough for pammse" endugh to live on. 

30* “The Aeroplanes at Brescia.” See Max,Brod, Franz Kafka^ 
a Biography, Ajipendix II. , 

'’31 This entry later, with a few changes and omis- 

sions, in Meditation, under the title, “Bachelor’s 111 Luck’” The 
version Kafka published has been translated by Willa’and 
Edv/in Muir and will appear m a forthcoming volume of 
Kafka’s ^rly sketches and stories. The trjn^ijtion appearing 
here is by the Muirs, except m those places where the German 
text of the published version and the version m the Diaries 
differ. 

32 Written at the time Kafka was studying for his bar exami- 
nation. ^ 

33 Emil Utitz, later a professor of philosophy, a fellow studpnt 

of Kafka’s at the Gymnasium ^ 

34 Ihe fagiily of Egon Erwin Kisch, aut'aor of Der rasende 
Reporter His brother, Paul Kiscd, studied Germanics. 

35 A toy through the aperture of which one pefceived the 
successive positions of a figure affixed to a revolving wheel. It 
thus created the illusion of moaon. 

An uneducated person. Kafka acquired this and similar ex- 
pressions from his conversations with the actor Lowy. 

^7 Felix Weltsch, the philosopher and author of Gnade und 
Frethett, 

38 “Properly, “circumciser.” 

39 A novel by Emil Strauss, whom Kafka estimated highly. 

40 This entry, slightly changed, appeared under the title of 
“■^he Sudden Walk,” in Meditation The translation is based 
on one made by the Muirs (see nji above). 

41 Christian von Ehrenfels, the philosopher and originator of 
the Gestalt theory in psychology. 

42 Cf, this entry with “Resolutions,” in Meditation. The trans- 
lation is based on one made by the Muirs (see n 3 1 above) . 



3 ^ 0 , NOTES 

4J. “Schlaflied fiir Mi^am,” by Richard Beer-Hofmann. 

44 Ip 'Hermann und'Dorothea. 

45 From Goethe’s “Der Fischer.”' 

46 The distmguished Viennese novehst Ottc Stossl, of whom 

.Kafka<had a very high opinion. ‘ ' 

47 Wdli Haas, the editor of Die Literarische Welt At the 
tune Kafka wrote t^us, Haas was editmg Die Herder blattef m 
Prague, ;n wliich he pubhshed the first chapter of “'Richard 
and Samuel” and dlso some of Werfel’s eprly work. 

48 Krfka was then working on the novel, Amerika, the tirh of 
whidh at that time was “Der Verschollene.” 

49 Written during the vacation trip to Weimar and the Harz 
Mountains (Juftfe 2^ to July 29, 1912). 

50 Kafka’s first pubhshed work. Meditation, which I had 
urged him very strongly to finish— or, rather, to put together 
out of his prose pieces that for the most part were already fin- 
ished. In the middle of August he finally gave me the fimshed 
manuscript, which I sent off to the Rowohlt Publishers (Kurt 
Wpiff). "rhe book was published early in 1913. 

51 Two days earher Kafka had met Miss F. B. of Berlin, latpr 
his fiancee. 0 

52 This entry . preceded by the complete draft of The Judg- 
ment. '' 

53 This entry is followed by the final version, untitled, of 
“The Stoker,” chapter one of Amerika 

54 On a visit to F. B 

55 Kafka’s governess in his childhood. 1 

56 The writer and critic Otto Pick, later editor of the Frager^ 
Presse. 

'57 The very talented novelist and dramatist Ernst Weiss, who 
later was quite close to Kafka. His first novel. Die Galeere, 
was published in 1913. He fled to France in 1933 and took his 
own life when the Nazis occupied Paris. 

58 An anthology of Kuerkegaard’s writmgs. 

59 Kafka’s trip to the Hartungen Sanatorium in Riva took 
place between this and the followmg entry. 

do Kropotkin’s memoirs were among Kafka’s favorite books, 
as were the memoirs of Alexander Herzen. 

■61 Of The^Metamorphosis. In the next entry is probably to be 



NOTI S 


I 


33^ , 


found the germ of “The Hunter Gracchm" (in the book The ^ 
Gi^at Wall of Chma), the scene of which is Riva. 

62 This remark which the boy addressed to Kafka was in com- 
mendation of the unhappy readmg of Klert’s Mtchael Kohl- 
haas that Kafka mentions m the entry of December ii, ipij. 
Kafka told this anecdote with so much humor that among his 
frienSS the boy’s remark became proverbial. Kafka said that 
the boy even added, quite precociously; “Very good!” When- 
ever someone, haughtily, patromzingly and with the air of a 
connoisseur, praised something he was entirely ignorant of, we 
liked to quote this “very good” and everyone immediately 
knew vhat was meant. 

Actually.. the quite ummportant incident of.thl? readmg was 
a much less melancholy affair than Kafka’s account would in- 
dicate. Kafka, needless to say, read wonderfully, I was present 
at the reading and remember it qmte well. It was only that he 
had chosen a selection that was much too long, and in the end 
was obliged to shorten it as he read. In addition, there was the 
qmte incongruous contrast between this great literature and, 
Ae ijninterested and inferior audience, the majority o/^^hom 
came to bene^jt affairs of this kind only for the* sake of the free ' 
cup of tea that they received. ’ 




CHRONOLbGT 1883-I913 




1 


1883’Boni July 3 in Prague 

,1903 Graduates from the German Gymnasium 

> 

190# ^Doctorate in Jurisprudence from Karl-Ferdinai^ 
University m Prague 

1907-08 T^tiporary employment in the *“ AsSicurazioni 
Generali,” an Italian insurance company 

1908 Appointed to post with government-sponsored 
“Arbeiter-Unfall-Versicherungs-Anstalt fur das 
Konigreich Bohmen in Prag” 

1909’ Publication of “Conversiation wifh the Suppli- 
cant” and "Conversation with the Crunken 
Man,” two dialogues from “Description of a 
Struggle,” in the hterary periodical Hyperion 
Pubhcation of “The Aeroplanes at Brescia” in the 
Prague newspaper Bohevna 

1910 Pubhcation in Bohemia of several short pieces 
later included in Meditation 

9 

1^1 1 Trip to Switzerland, Italy and Paris 
Meets Yiddish theater troupe in Prague 

1912 Publication in the literary periodical, Herder- 
blatter, of “Die erste lange Eisenbahnfahrt,” first 
chapter of “Richard and Spmuel” 

333 



CHRONOI-OG‘'r 

Esgins Amenka 

Trip to Weimar and the Harz Mountains 
Writes, JAe Jud^ent 

Completes “The &oker,” chapter onsiof ^merika 

a 

1913 T?nhlicadon oi Meditation 

ePublication of The Judgmega iq the literary year- 
book Arkadia 
Trip to Riva 



I>UBLI8B£It’s NOTE 


The Diaries pf FrShz Kafka will appear in their entirety in 
two volumes, of which this present volume is the first. The 
second, a^d final, volume is in preparation; it will contain 
a postscript by Max Brod describing the manuscript of the 
Diariy and the manner in which it has been editeil. 




LIST OF AUTHORS, ARTISTS, PERIODICALS, AND WORKS 
9 ' t 


It nisasmoi possible to identify all tJje authors and artists 
meniigned in the text. In such cases their names are- not 
listed here. 


Abramowitsch, Solomon Jacob, 
see^'jlendele Mocher Sfonm 

Abschied nm der Jugend, play 
by Max Brod- 42 

“Aeroplanes at Brescia, The," by 
Franz Kafka 145, n 30 

Adler, Jacob P , founder of dis- 
tinguished faniily of actors: 
110 

Akuon, Die, pohtical and liter- 
ary monthfy edited by F. 
Pfemfert, published in Berlin 
1^-1932. 124 

Alarcos, by Friedrich Schlegel. 
* 5 * 

ArSenka, by Franz Kafka- n 48 
(2^1), »jj (278) 

ATmalen fur Naturphtlosaphte, 
moRist publicanon edited by 
Wilhelm Ostwald, published 
in Leipzig ipoi-igii- 58 

Annunzio, Gabriele D’ (1864- 
19!^), Itahan poet and novel- 
ist. 261 

Arkadia, poetry yearbook edited 
by Max Brod, appeared in 
Leipzig; 1913- 276 

Arme Spiehnarm, Der, by Franz 
Gnllparzer: 265 


Arnold Beer, novel by Max 
Brod: 261, 276 

> ja 

Baal Shem Tov, Israel B. Eliezei 
(c. J700-1760), founder of 
Hasidism- 226 

“Bachelor’s 111 Luck,” by Franz 
Kafka n3i (151) 

Bar Kokhba, play by Abiahim 
Goldfaden- 132, 13^, 139 

Bartered Brtie, The, opera by 
Friedrich Smetana- 87 

Baum, Oskar (1883- Jewish 
author and music crinc from 
Prague 37, 39, 123, 131, 132, 
133, 163, 188, 212, 221, 232, 233, 

247 ^ 57 . *78, n 8 

Beer-Hofmann, Richard (1866- 
1946), Austrian Jewish lyric 
poet and dramatist n 43 (246) 

Beeimann, Richard Arnold, 
pseud, of Arnold HoUnegel 
(1883-1939), author of travel 
books. 322 

Beethoven und das Liebespaar, 
novel by Wilhelm Schafer: 
178 

Beradt, Martin (1881- ), Ger- 
man Jewish nov^st 42 

Bergmann, Hugo (1883.- ), 


337 



33« authors, ARTISTS, 

'Je■^ylsh p^ilosophei from 
Prague, now professor at the 
Hebrew University 135, 105, 
206, 323 , 1 

Bernhardt, Sarah (1844-1923) 

71 

Besuch aus dent by 

Franz JVerfel 263 
Bialik, Hayim Nahman (1873- 
i93'4), HebreV poet loi 
BtbSrpelz, by Gerhart Haupt- 
mann 175 

Bie, Oskar (1^-1978), German 
art cntic 233 

Biedermann, W von, editor of 
Gesprache nut Goethe; 250 
Bimbaum, Nathan (1864-1937), 
Austrian Jewish author and 
Ziomst publicist 223, 224 
Bizet, Georges (1838-1875), 
French composej xoi 
Blei, Franz (1871-1943), Ger- 
man novelist and satirist 13, 
165 

Blumenfeld, Kurt (1884- ), 
German Zionist leader, now 
in Jerusalem 235 
Bohemia, Prague German-lan- 
guage newspaper 243, 244 
Brahms, Johannes (1833-1897) • 
176, 177 

“Brescia,” see “Aeroplanes at 
Brescia, The,” by Franz Kafka 
Brief e, by Heinrich von Kleist 
46 

Bnefwechsel ziwtschen Rahel 
und David Veit 251, 253 
*Brod, Max (1884- ) 42, 54, 
55. 60. ”7., 123. iS<S. J<S3. J70, 


ERIOOICALS AXD WORKS 

ZIO, 211,221, 259, 261, 265, 276, 
n 14 (66), n 30 (143) 

^ 3 uch des Richters, by Sj^ren 
Kierkegaard 298, n 38 

9 

Castle, The, by Franz <■ Kafka 
n 18 (80) • 

Chnstliche IP elt. Die, Protestant 
magazine first published 1886 
m Marburg 205 ^ 

Qaudel, Paul (1868- ), French 
poet 30, n 3 

“Confidence Tiickster,’’see‘ ‘Un- 
masking a Confidence Trick- 
ster,” by Franz Kafka 
“Conversation with the Supph- 
cant,” by Franz Kafka n4 
(22) 

Daudet, Alphonse (1840-1897), 
French novelist 147 ^ 

Dauthendey, Max (t867»i9i8), 
German no\ elist and poet 47 
Davids Geige, by Joseph I-atei- 
ner 183 

Dehmel, Richard (1863-1920), 
German poet 238, 239 ^ 

“Description of a Struggle^’ by 
Franz Kafka n 4 fza) 
Deutsches Abendblatt, PragiJte 
German-language newspaper: 
244 

Dichtung und Wahrhett, by Jo- 
hann Wolfgang von Goethe 
199, 202, 229 

Dick, Eisik Meir (1808-1894), 
Yiddish author and novelist:, 
225 

Dickens, Charles (181S-1870): 
6i, 77 


* Listed o.Jy when mentioned in the text as an author. 
<* 



AUTHORS, ARTIST^, PERlboiCALS AND WORKS )pOi 


Dtener zweier Herm, Der, by 
Carlo Goldoni 

Dostoevsky, Fyodor (1821- 
1881) 291, j22 

Dream ^ ofcii Spring Morning, 
play by Gabriele D’Annun- 

Z109t26l 

Dubrovacka Trilogipa, play by 
Ivo Vojnovic ■ 

A • 

Edelstatt, David (iSfid-iSga), 
Y^'dish poet 108, 109 
EheleutBythy Martin Beradt 42 
Ehrenfels, Christian von (1859- 
1932), German philosopher 
and playwright 229, 258, 304, 
041 

“Eiseme Frau, Die,” novel by 
Nahum Meir Schaikewitz 225 
Eltezar ben Schevta, by Jacob 
diordin 1,^1, 122 
Erdgeist, play by Frank Wede- 
]bnd, 227, 228 

“Erste lange Eisenbahnfahrt, 
Die,” by Max Brod and Franz 
'^afka n 14 (66) 

Fall Jacobyjhn, Der, by Sieg- 
' fried Jacobsohn- 303 
Fish ke, der Krwmmer, by Men- 
dele Mocher Sfonm 225 
Flaubert, Gustave (1821-1880) 

' 256, 264, 292 ■> 

Franz Kafka, a Biography, by 
Max Brod B30 (145) 

Fred, W., pseud, for Alfred 
Wechsler (1879- ), German 
Jewisli writer. 34 
Freud, Sigmund (1856-1939): 
'276 


Freytag,' Gustav-’ (1816-2895), 
German novelist 247 

Fromer, Jacob (1865- ), Jew- 
ish philosiopher and historian: 

Frug, ’ Simon Samuel (i860- , 
1916), Yiddish poet 22^ 

Gabriel Schillngs Flucht, by 
Gerhart Hauptmann- 219 

Galeere, Die, by Ernst Weiss: 

288, 318, 7257 
> 

Gesprache mtt Goethe, edited 
by W von Biedcrmann- 250 

Glaube und Heimat, by Karl 
Schonherr 40 

Goethe, Johann Wolfgang voa 
(1749-1832) 31, 36, 68^^731 

177, 197, 199, 202, 222, 227, 228, 
229, 230, 2,p, 233, 2^8, 239, 244, 
246, 250, 251, 252, 253, 256, 267, 
7244,7145 

Goethe Yearbook, edited by L. 
Geiger, appeared m Frankfort 
1880-1913 253 

Goldfaden, Abraham (1840- 
1908), Hebrew and Yiddish 
poet and playwright- 95, 109, 
132 . H-h >39. ^*3. 

Goldoni, Carlo (i 707 -> 793 ). 
Italian dramatist 251 

Gordin, Jacob (1853-1909), Yid- 
dish dramatist no, tii, 112, 
121, 122, 161, 171, 227 

Gordon, Judah Loeb (1830- 
1892), poet of the Russian Ha- 
skalah 224 

Gott, Mensch, Teitfel, by Jacob 
Gordm III, 112* 



3^ AUTHORS, ARTISTS, 

Graet^ Heinf^ch (181^-1891), 
Geiman Jewish histonan 115 
Graf von Gletchen, by Wilhelm 
Schmidtbonn 223 f ' 

'Great "Wall of China, The, by 
Franz Kafka n 6 t (304) 
Grillparzer, Franz (1791-1872), 
Auscriail dramaac poet: 259, 
^65,192 ^ , 

Gutsj’eschichte, Erne, by Selma 
Lagerlof 238, 239, 242 


Haas, Wdh (1^1- <), German 
Jewish writer, editor. 259, 260, 


303, n 47 

Hassliche, Dte, by Oskar Baum: 
163 

^albe, Mat (1863-1944), Ger- 
man novelist and playwright 

165 

Hamlet, "by Willtim Shake- 
speare 239 '* 

Hamsun, Khut (1839- ), Nor- 
wegian novelist 42, 67, 73 


Harden, Maximilian (1861- 
1927), German Jewish jour- 
nalist 248 


Hasek, Jaroslav (1883-1923), 
Czech writer n 13 (69) 
Hauptmann, Gerhart (1862- 
1946), German dramaast. 34, 
173, 210, 261, n 2 (11) 


Hebbel, Christian Friedrich 
(1813-1863), German poet 
and dramatist 31, 34, 239, 263 
Heine, Heinrich (1797-1856). 
148, 226 

Herder, Johann Gottfried von 
(1774-1803),' German author 
and philqsoflher 231 0 


^’ERIODfCALS AND WORKS 

Herderblatter, Die, literary mag- 
azine published in Prague n 47 
Hermann imd Dorothea^ by Jo- 
hann Wolfeang' von Goethe: 

, 232,2244 ' ^ 

Hermann, Hugo (1887-1940), 
Zionist editor and autho%ftom 
Prague 233 

Hermann, I' -u (1888- ), Zion- 
ist worker and author ifrom 
Prague 233 

Herzele Mepches, by Moses 
Richter 223 ‘ , 

Herzen, Alexander (1812-1870), 
Russian author and revolution- 
ist n6o 

Hippodamte, by Jaroslav Vrch- 
licky 180, 181 

Histotre de la Litterature Judeo- 
Allemande, by Meyer Is^r 
Pmes 223, 224 ^ 

“History of the Devil,” by Gus- 
tav Roskoff 295 c 

History of the Jews, by Hein- 
rich Graetz 125 

Hofmannsthal, Hugo von (18^- 
1929), Austrian poet 235 '■ 
Hose, by Karl Stemheim 163 • 
Hugo, Victori (1802-1883) 0149 
Humboldt, Wilhelm von (1767- 
1835), German philologist and 
man of lecters 252 
“Hunter Gracchus, The,” "by 
Franz Kafka n 61 (304) 

Ingres, Jean Auguste Dominique 
(1780-1867), French painter: 
>57 

Insel Almanack, literary alma- 



) k 

AUTHORS, ARTISTSS, PERIODICALS AND WORKS 


^4* 


nac first published i^o; m 
Leipzig by Insel-Verlag 124 
Iphigeme auf Tauns, by JohaAn 

Wolfgang pon Goethe 31 
> 

j j* 

Jacobsohn, Siegfried (i88i- 
1^7), German Jewish publi- 
cist and editor of Die Welt- 
buhne 303 j , 1 
Joltii Ftlle de Perth, La, by 
Georges Bizet 101 
Jotgnalisten, play by Gustav 
Freytsg ,247 ‘ 

Judgment, The, by Franz Kafka* 

275. 178. i 9<5. 

Judmnen, by Max Brod 54, 55, 
60 

Jung-StiUmg, Johann Heinrich 
(1740-1817), German Pietist 
^writer. 253 

Jungfem vesn Bischofsberg, by 
Gerhart Hauptmann 34, n z 
Ju) 

Kainz, Josef <1858-1910), great 
Austrian actor 237 
Kt^l Stauffers Lebensgang. Erne 
j Chronik der Leidenschaft, by 
Wilhelm Schafer 168, 173, 174 
Kelletmann, Bernhard (1879- 
German novelist 31, 31 
, Kemer, Justinus (1786-1852), 
German poet 34 
Kierkegaard, Sdten (1813-1855), 
Danish philosopher 298, 
Kisch, Egon Erwin (1885- ), 
Jewish author and journalist 
from Prague: 154, 210, Z43, 

• *44. «3;l 


Kleist,. Heinrich von (177^ 
1811), Germ^ dramati|st^: 46, 
r6i, 320, n6z (321) 

Komer, jl^arl Theodor (1791- 
1813), German poet 7,78 
Kol JJUdre, by A M. Scharkan- 
sky: 106, 217 

Konkurrenz, by Oskar Baum: 

1*3 

Kraus, Karl (1874-1936)^, Aus- 
trian Jewish publicist add ed- 
itor of Die Fackel; 54 
Kreutzer The, by Leo 

Tolstoy 39 

Kropotkin, Prince Peter Aleze- 
vich (1842-1921), Russian an- 
archist author 303, n 60 
Kubm, Alfred (1877- ), Czech 
painter and writer. 67, 70, 73, 
94, 163 

Kusmin, AJichail (1875-1936), 

> Russian poet and novelist: 36 
Kvapil, Jaroslav (1868- ), 
Czech dramatist 181 

Laforgue, Jules (1860-1887), 
French symbolist poet, n 6 
Lagerlof, Selma (1858-1940), 
Swedish author 238, 239, 242 
Lateiner, Joseph ( 1853-1935) j 
Yiddish playwright 80, 112, 
183 

Lenz, Jacob Michael Reinhold 
(1751-1792), German poet, 
who went msane* 269 
Lichtverkauferm, by Morris 
Rosenfeld loi 

Literansche Welt, Die, literary 
magazine editeij, by Wilh Haas 
3925-1934 m Beilm. n 47 



/ « 

342. AUTHORS, ARTISTS, BERIOD3CALS AND WORKS 


Loos, Adolf (i870-i 933[), Aus- 
trian Jewish architect 54 
Lmse, by Johann Heinrich Voss 
*53 r ' 

Madame la mart, by Raohilde 
261, -263 

Maimon, Golomon (1754-1800), 
German Jewish philosopher 
from Poland 252 

I 

Mam'zelle Nttotuhe, by A Mil- 
laud and H Meilhac 256 
Medttatton,hyt^ia.mfKa£ka. R4 
(22), 1131 (151), 1140 (214), 
B42 (230), n 50 (266) 

Meilhac, Henri (1831-1892), 
French librettist 256 
<-Memotrs of a Revolutiontit, by 
PRnce Peter Alexevich Kro- 
potkin 3f)3, «6o 
Mendele Mocher Sfbrim (1836- 
1917), Yiddish and Hebrew 
novelist 225 

Mendelssohn, Moses ( 1729-1786), 
German Jewish philosopher 
129, 224 

Meshumed, Der, by Joseph La- 
teiner 80, n 18 

Metamorphosis, The, by Franz 
‘ Kafka 303, n 61 (304) 

Michael Kohlhaas, by Hemnch 
von Kleist 320,1162(321) 
Millaud, A. (1844-1892), French 
Jewish playwright 256 
Miroir, Parisian magazme 269 
Missgeschtckten, Die, by Wil- 
helm Schafer 124, 125, n 16 
Moricke, Eduard (1804-1875), 
Geixnan patt 169 1 


Moissi^ Alexander (1880-1935), 
famous German actor’ 238, 
6*45 ‘ 

Mohere (162^-167,3) 17*6 
Moraines legendaires, by Jules 
' Laforgue »6 r 

Morgenrot, by Otto Stosslj,e5ff 
Musset, Alfred de (1810-1857), 
Frenck- peer 30 
My Past and Thoughtsc the 
Memoirs of Alexander Her- 
zen. 9160 “ 

r » 

Nackte Mann, Der, 'by Emil 
Strauss 210, n 39 
Nerval, Gerard de (1808-1855), 
French poet. 148 
Neue Rundschau, Die, literary 
monthly first published 1890 
in Berlm by S Fischer Ver- 
lag: 1 24, 210 Q 

Nomberg, Hirsch Uavid (1876- 
1927), Yiddish writer 217 

e 

Offenbach, Jacques (1819- 
1880), French Jewish com- 
poser 227 ^ 

Orgamsmus des Judentums^ by 
Jacob Fromer 223 
Orpheus in the Underworld, by 
Jacques Offenbach- 227 • 

Pallenberg, Max (1877-1934), 
famous German Jewish come-o 
dian 227 *■ 

Pan, Berlin literary and art mag- 
azme edited by Paul Cassirer: 
99 

Peretz, Isaac Loeb (1851^1915), 
Yiddish and Hebrew writer: 
101, 109, 226 



AUTHORS, ARTISTS, PERl’oDICALS AND WORKS 


"1 

Vhedre, by Jean Racine. 30 
Pick, Otto (1887-) ), Jewisji 
journalist from Prague: 134, 
247, 261, 28^, 215^ 

Pmes, -jMeyfer Isser (1881- ), 
, Jewish hterary historian from 
Ruikia ,223, 224 

“Podriatechik, Der,” by Nahum 
Meir Schaikewitz 225 
Prager Presse, German-language 
ne'yspaper edited by Otto 
Pick n j6 

Prager Tagblatt, Prague Ger- 
man-language newspaper 178, 
*34. *39. *40. *4*. *43 

Rabmowitz, Solomon, see Sho- 
lom Aleichem 

Rachilde, pseud for Marguerite 
Valletce (1862-1933), French 
novelist ai.d playwright 261, 
262, 263 

Rkcine, Jean (1639-1699) 30 
Ratten, Die, by Gerhart Haupt- 
mann 261 

Retsfschatten, by Justinus Ker- 
ner 34 

“Resolutions,” by Franz Kafka 
R42 (230) 

“iWchard and Samuel,” by Max 
Brod and Franz Kafka* 123, 

• 151, 156, 163, 169, I/O, 210, n 14 
(06), »2i (9i),»47 
Richepm, Jean (1849-1926), 
French poet, novelist and 
dramatist 146, 148, 149 
Richter, Moses (1873-1939), Yid* 
dish playwnght 176, 223 
Rideamus, pseud, for Fritz Oli- 


ver (1874- . ),eGermar} satiri- 
cal poet 238, 239 ’ 

Rosenfeld, Morris (1862-1917), 
Yiddish poet loi, 108, 109, 
, 222, 226 ^ 

Roskoff, Gustav (1814-1889), 
Getman'liuthor of Geschtebte 
des T eufels. 295 

Rowohlt, Ems^, German, pub- 
lisher 266, 268, 270, n 50 (266) 

Ruckert, Friedrich (1788-1866), 
German ^oit 165 

Rundschau, see Neue Rund- 
schau, Die 

Schadow, Johann Gottfried 
(1764-1850), German sculp- 
tor 42 

Schafer, Wilhelm (1868- ), 
German novelist 124, 125, 
.168, 173, 174, 178, 2126 (124) 
Scharkansky, A M , Polish Jew- 
ish poet and playwright* 106, 
III, 217 

Schaubuhne, literary weekly ed- 
ited by S Jacobsohn, published 
1905-1918 in Berlin, then ab- 
sorbed in Die Weltbuhne' 117 
Schechite, by Jacob Gordin. 161 ^ 
Schicksals Sptele und Ernst, Des, 
by Oskar Baum 221 
Schiller, Friedrich (1759-1805): 
4*. 73. '45. '*59. '77. *39. *5'. 
*53 

Schlegel, Friedrich (1772-1824), 
German romantic poet and 
cntic* 252 

Schmidtbonn, Wilhelm (1876-), 
(German writer 223 



r 

341;'' AUTHORS, ARTISTS, 

Sc]meiier als G^mewderSt, Der, 
by iTloses Richter 176 

Schnitzler, Arthur (1862-1931), 
Austnan Jewish plSywright 
and novelist 153 
Schnorr, Julius von Caroisfeld 
(1794-1872), German Pre-Ra- 
phaelite painter 31 
Schonljerr, iCari (1869-1943), 
Austrian dramatist; 40 
Schomer, pseud, for Nahum 
Meir ^haikeiyitz (1849- 
1906), Pohsl/^ewirfi novelist: 
215 


'kRIODl'cALS AND WORKS 

“Stoker, The,” see Amerika, by 
Franz Kafl^a n 53 (278) 
sAasse der Verlassenhed, Dte, 
by VV Fre< 5 ^ 34 ' 

.Strauss, Emil (1866- ), Ger- 
man novelist 210, w 39 
Strobl, Karl Hans (1877-1(^3’), 
Austrian not ehst from Prague , 
221 ' »» 

“Sudden Walk, The,” by Franz 
Kafka 7240' (214) 

Sulamtth, by Abraham Caold- 
faden 95, 223 


Selbstmorder, by David Edel- 
statt. 109 


Shakespeare, WiUiam (1564- 
‘'■^•"1616) 239, 246, 259 


Shaw, George Bernard ( 185,6- ) . 
114, lit, 322 

Sholom Aleichem (1859-1916), 
Yiddish KTtelist. loi, 226 


Smetana, Friednch (1824-1884), 
Czech composer- 87 
Scael, Madame dc (1766-1817), 
French writer 253 


Steiner, Rudolf (1861-1925), 
German founder of the an- 
, throposophical society 54, 56, 
57, 72 11 

Stemenbraut, Dte, by Christian 
von Ehrenfels 258 


Sternheim, Karl (1878-1943), 
German dramatist. 165 
Stilling, see Jung-StiUmg, Jo- 
hann Heinrich 


Stossl, Otto (1875-193?), Aus- 
tnan playwright and novelist. 
256, »2 46 '' ’ 


Tagblatt, see Frager Tagblatt 
Talmud. 122, 159, 161, 162, 166, 
196, 225, 226 

Taten des grossen Alexander, 
by Michail Kusmin 36 
Tetschen-Bodenbacher Zeitung, 
German-language > newspaper, 
published in Bohemia 90 
Thcilhaber, Felix Aaron “■ 
(1884- ), German Jewish 

writer, now m Palestme- 229 
Tolstoy, Leo (1828-1910). 39 
Tragic Overture, by Johannes 
Brahms 177 

Trietsch, Davis (1870-^1935), 
German Zionist writer 263 
Tucholsky, Kurt (1890-1935), 
German Jewish pubhcist: 71 

K 

“Unhappiness," by Franz Kafka’ 
724 (22) 

“Unmaskmg a Confidence 
Trickster,” by Frauz Kafka: 
265,724 (22) 

Untz, Emil (1883- ), Jewish 



AUTHORS, ARTISTS, PERIODICALS ANd'WORKS 345 


i 

philosopher from Prague: 153, 
271. ” 33 

Veit, David, see Brtefwechsel 
Zfwischen Rahef^ UTid Davtd^ 
Veit 

■VJojnovic, Ivo (1857- ), Ser- 
biaa dramatist ^04 
Volk, des harten Schl^es, Das, 
b}( Oskar Baun) n 8 
Voss, Johann Heinrich (1751- 
18216), German p*oet 253 
VrcRlicly, Jarostav (1853-1912), 
’Czech p<?et 180, 181 

Wassermann, Jakob (1873- 
1933)1 German Jewish novel- 
ist 276 

Wedekind, Frank (18^4-1918), 
German dramaust 227, 228 
Wfiss, Ernst (1884-1940), Ger- 
man Jewish novelist and poet: 
288, 301, 318, 321, 322, 1257 
Weife Land, Das, by Arthur 
Schnitzler: 153 

Weltsch, Felix (1884- ), Jew- 


ish philosopher and publicftt 
from* Prague, ^flow m^Pafes- 
tme 188, 189, 210, 2iy, 224, 
227, 2fi2, 263, 279, 294, 304, J23, 
«37 ■ 

Weltsch, Robert (1891- •), Zi- ’ 
onist journalist from Prague, 
now in igalestine 233, 234 
Werfel, Franz (1890-1945), Aus- 
trian Jewish poe^and novel- 
ist 182, 188, 263, 269, 27S, n 47 
Wiegler, Paul (1878- ), 'Ger- 
man novelist and critic 3 1, n 6 
Wilde Megsdh, Qer, by Jacob 
Gordin 110, 112, 121, 171 
Wolff, Kurt (1887- ), German 
publisher, now publisher of 
Pantheon Books m America: 
«50 (266) 

Zenot 34 
Zohar: zzd ^ 

Ztlnser, Eliakum (1845-1913), 
Yiddish folk poet *225 
“Zwischen Menschenfressem,” 
by Nahum Meir Schaikewitz: 1 



